art thou sociable, now art thou Romeo; now art thou what thou art, by
her into a fool's paradise, as they say, it were a very gross kind of
an ill thing to be off'red to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing.
man that hath a hair more or a hair less in his beard than thou hast.
another for tying his new shoes with an old riband? And yet thou wilt
fought with the men, I will be cruel with the maids- I will cut off
Samp. Me they shall feel while I am able to stand; and 'tis known I
Greg. I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as they list.
had a better love to berhyme her), Dido a dowdy, Cleopatra a gypsy,
Mer. Good Peter, to hide her face; for her fan's the fairer face of
other reason but because thou hast hazel eyes. What eye but such an
Tyb. You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an you will give me
Pet. O, I cry you mercy! you are the singer. I will say for you. It
with his nets; but I am sent to find those persons whose names are
look to the plate. Good thou, save me a piece of marchpane and, as
tall man! a very good whore!' Why, is not this a lamentable thing,
flowed in. Laura, to his lady, was but a kitchen wench (marry, she
sure, I have in my whole five. Was I with you there for the goose?
weapon should quickly have been out, I warrant you. I dare draw as
than any man's, yet his leg excels all men's; and for a hand and a
they are past compare. He is not the flower of courtesy, but, I'll
Mer. No, 'tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a church door;
Nurse. Mistress! what, mistress! Juliet! Fast, I warrant her, she.
Enter Sampson and Gregory (with swords and bucklers) of the house
are ever thrust to the wall. Therefore I will push Montague's men
rich Capulet; and if you be not of the house of Montagues, I pray
come and crush a cup of wine. Rest you merry!               Exit.
but not to the purpose. Signior Romeo, bon jour! There's a French
Mer. Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting; it is a most sharp sauce.
great natural that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in
have found him than he was when you sought him. I am the youngest
soon as another man, if I see occasion in a good quarrel, and the
quivers. Scurvy knave! Pray you, sir, a word; and, as I told you,
anger her sometimes, and tell her that Paris is the properer man;
clout in the versal world. Doth not rosemary and Romeo begin both
know it begins with some other letter; and she hath the prettiest
Nurse. Your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a courteous,
second cup draws him on the drawer, when indeed there is no need.
for one would kill the other. Thou! why, thou wilt quarrel with a
eye would spy out such a quarrel? Thy head is as full of quarrels
Samp. No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir; but I bite my
Enter Romeo, Mercutio, Benvolio, with five or six other Maskers;
More torches here! [Exeunt Maskers.] Come on then, let's to bed.
Rom. Pardon, good Mercutio. My business was great, and in such a
Mer. That's as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains a
thy pump, that, when the single sole of it is worn, the jest may
quoth 'a? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I may find the
were lustier than he is, and twenty such jacks; and if I cannot,
will keep to myself; but first let me tell ye, if ye should lead
that hath lain asleep in the sun. Didst thou not fall out with a
Pet. Then will I lay the serving-creature's dagger on your pate.
2. Mus. I say 'silver sound' because musicians sound for silver.
Chief Watch. 'the ground is bloody. Search about the churchyard.
Greg. That shows thee a weak slave; for the weakest goes to the
Samp. 'Tis true; and therefore women, being the weaker vessels,
Samp. Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them; which is
Samp. Draw, if you be men. Gregory, remember thy swashing blow.
Serv. Find them out whose names are written here? It is written
Serv. Perhaps you have learned it without book. But I pray, can
Serv. Madam, the guests are come, supper serv'd up, you call'd,
Mer. Alas, poor Romeo, he is already dead! stabb'd with a white
of the very first house, of the first and second cause. Ah, the
these new tuners of accent! 'By Jesu, a very good blade! a very
so much on the new form that they cannot sit at ease on the old
Mer. Without his roe, like a dried herring. O flesh, flesh, how
Mer. Well said! Follow me this jest now till thou hast worn out
Mer. 'Tis no less, I tell ye; for the bawdy hand of the dial is
Mer. No hare, sir; unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie, that is
Romeo, will you come to your father's? We'll to dinner thither.
stand by too, and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure!
Rom. Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I protest unto
Nurse. Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady. Lord, Lord!
Nurse. Well, you have made a simple choice; you know not how to
the confines of a tavern, claps me his sword upon the table and
says 'God send me no need of thee!' and by the operation of the
as an egg is full of meat; and yet thy head hath been beaten as
man for coughing in the street, because he hath wakened thy dog
fiddlestick; here's that shall make you dance. Zounds, consort!
of his pitcher by the ears? Make haste, lest mine be about your
Cap. Make haste, make haste. [Exit Fellow.] Sirrah, fetch drier
Being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut. What, ho! apothecary!
John. Brother, I'll go and bring it thee.                 Exit.
Samp. But if you do, sir, am for you. I serve as good a man as
Ben. I'll pay that doctrine, or else die in debt.      Exeunt.
Rom. Stay, fellow; I can read.                       He reads.
Serv. Now I'll tell you without asking. My master is the great
Wife. We follow thee.                       Exit [Servingman].
Rom. [to a Servingman] What lady's that, which doth enrich the
Jul. A thousand times good night!                        Exit.
Helen and Hero hildings and harlots, This be a gray eye or so,
Rom. Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did I give you?
Mer. Nay, if our wits run the wild-goose chase, I am done; for
thou hast more of the wild goose in one of thy wits than, I am
Mer. Yea, is the worst well? Very well took, i' faith! wisely,
Nurse. An 'a speak anything against me, I'll take him down, an
good soul, had as lieve see a toad, a very toad, as see him. I
Mer. Nay, an there were two such, we should have none shortly,
Tyb. I am for you.                                    [Draws.]
Nurse. Marry, I will; and this is wisely done.           Exit.
Enter three or four [Fellows, with spits and logs and baskets.
Thou shalt be loggerhead. [Exit Fellow.] Good faith, 'tis day.
Enter Friar [Laurence] and the County [Paris], with Musicians.
Pet. No money, on my faith, but the gleek. I will give you the
Pet. Then have at you with my wit! I will dry-beat you with an
Citizens of Verona; Gentlemen and Gentlewomen of both houses;
Maskers, Torchbearers, Pages, Guards, Watchmen, Servants, and
Samp. A dog of that house shall move me to stand. I will take
been poor-John. Draw thy tool! Here comes two of the house of
Officer. Clubs, bills, and partisans! Strike! beat them down!
that the shoemaker should meddle with his yard and the tailor
But to rejoice in splendour of my own.              [Exeunt.]
1. Serv. Away with the join-stools, remove the court-cubbert,
Enter the Maskers, Enter, [with Servants,] Capulet, his Wife,
wench's black eye; shot through the ear with a love song; the
butcher of a silk button, a duellist, a duellist! a gentleman
grandsir, that we should be thus afflicted with these strange
Mer. O, here's a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an inch
Rom. One, gentlewoman, that God hath made for himself to mar.
will speak more in a minute than he will stand to in a month.
Nurse. Now, afore God, I am so vexed that every part about me
Nurse. Good heart, and I faith I will tell her as much. Lord,
Nurse. I will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as I
but I'll warrant you, when I say so, she looks as pale as any
Nurse. Ah, mocker! that's the dog's name. R is for the- No; I
and a kind, and a handsome; and, I warrant, a virtuous- Where
Mer. Come, come, thou art as hot a jack in thy mood as any in
Italy; and as soon moved to be moody, and as soon moody to be
Mer. Consort? What, dost thou make us minstrels? An thou make
minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but discords. Here's my
mean to make bold withal, and, as you shall use me hereafter,
dry-beat the rest of the eight. Will you pluck your sword out
shall find me a grave man. I am peppered, I warrant, for this
mouse, a cat, to scratch a man to death! a braggart, a rogue,
villain, that fights by the book of arithmetic! Why the devil
Nurse. [within] Let me come in, and you shall know my errand.
Pet. Musicians, O, musicians, 'Heart's ease,' 'Heart's ease'!
Pet. O, musicians, because my heart itself plays 'My heart is
To lie discolour'd by this place of peace? [Enters the tomb.]
2. Watch. Here's Romeo's man. We found him in the churchyard.
Samp. 'Tis all one. I will show myself a tyrant. When I have
Greg. 'Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou hadst
Samp. [aside to Gregory] Is the law of our side if I say ay?
Have at thee, coward!                            They fight.
[Gives back the paper.] A fair assembly. Whither should they
my young lady ask'd for, the nurse curs'd in the pantry, and
everything in extremity. I must hence to wait. I beseech you
2. Serv. When good manners shall lie all in one or two men's
Be brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all.      Exeunt.
Now seeming sweet, convert to bitt'rest gall.          Exit.
Thus from my lips, by thine my sin is purg'd.  [Kisses her.]
Give me my sin again.                          [Kisses her.]
Come, let's away; the strangers all are gone.        Exeunt.
Stay but a little, I will come again.                [Exit.]
pricksong-keeps time, distance, and proportion; rests me his
Mer. The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting fantasticoes-
Rom. O single-sold jest, solely singular for the singleness!
Rom. Thou wast never with me for anything when thou wast not
Rom. I stretch it out for that word 'broad,' which, added to
Mer. Why, is not this better now than groaning for love? Now
art as well as by nature. For this drivelling love is like a
Mer. O, thou art deceiv'd! I would have made it short; for I
Nurse. If you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with you.
Nurse. Marry, farewell! I Pray you, Sir, what saucy merchant
Rom. A gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself talk and
my young lady bid me enquire you out. What she bid me say, I
therefore, if you should deal double with her, truly it were
when 'twas a little prating thing- O, there is a nobleman in
sententious of it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you
Mer. Thou art like one of these fellows that, when he enters
addle as an egg for quarrelling. Thou hast quarrell'd with a
Ben. An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man should
Alla stoccata carries it away.                      [Draws.]
but 'tis enough, 'twill serve. Ask for me to-morrow, and you
world. A plague o' both your houses! Zounds, a dog, a rat, a
Enter Prince [attended], Old Montague, Capulet, their Wives,
'Hold, friends! friends, part!' and swifter than his tongue,
Mist-like infold me from the search of eyes.          Knock.
Thou wilt be taken.- Stay awhile!- Stand up;          Knock.
What simpleness is this.- I come, I come!             Knock.
The hateful mansion.                     [Draws his dagger.]
Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.           Exit.
Friar. Go hence; good night; and here stands all your state:
Cap. God's bread I it makes me mad. Day, night, late, early,
Trust to't. Bethink you. I'll not be forsworn.         Exit.
Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.            Exit.
If all else fail, myself have power to die.            Exit.
Till then, adieu, and keep this holy kiss.             Exit.
Serv. You shall have none ill, sir; for I'll try if they can
For so he said he would.                         Play music.
For well you know this is a pitiful case.            [Exit.]
Poor living corse, clos'd in a dead man's tomb!        Exit.
Here in the churchyard; yet I will adventure.     [Retires.]
What, with a torch? Muffle me, night, awhile.     [Retires.]
His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt.        [Retires.]
Open the tomb, lay me with Juliet.                   [Dies.]
Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die.          Falls.
To make me die with a restorative.             [Kisses him.]
Chief Watch. Hold him in safety till the Prince come hither.
Greg. [aside to Sampson] Say 'better.' Here comes one of my
here writ, and can never find what names the writing person
Mer. Why, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline,
Ben. Nay, he will answer the letter's master, how he dares,
minim rest, one, two, and the third in your bosom! the very
flies, these fashion-mongers, these pardona-mi's, who stand
art thou fishified! Now is he for the numbers that Petrarch
salutation to your French slop. You gave us the counterfeit
Rom. Swits and spurs, swits and spurs! or I'll cry a match.
was come to the whole depth of my tale, and meant indeed to
Rom. I can tell you; but young Romeo will be older when you
Rom. What wilt thou tell her, nurse? Thou dost not mark me.
town, one Paris, that would fain lay knife aboard; but she,
warrant him, as gentle as a lamb. Go thy ways, wench; serve
Mer. Good King of Cats, nothing but one of your nine lives.
Friar. [aside] I would I knew not why it should be slow'd.-
Jul. Love give me strength! and strength shall help afford.
Serv. Marry, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick his own
fingers. Therefore he that cannot lick his fingers goes not
I will carry no crotchets. I'll re you, I'll fa you. Do you
Montague, heads of two houses at variance with each other.
Greg. The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.
Enter an officer, and three or four Citizens with clubs or
Citizens. Down with the Capulets! Down with the Montagues!
I never should forget it. 'Wilt thou not, Jule?' quoth he,
Mer. More than Prince of Cats, I can tell you. O, he's the
Rom. And is it not, then, well serv'd in to a sweet goose?
Mer. Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.
Nurse. By my troth, it is well said. 'For himself to mar,'
I'll find those that shall. Scurvy knave! I am none of his
choose a man. Romeo? No, not he. Though his face be better
Nurse. Will you speak well of him that kill'd your cousin?
Jul. Wash they his wounds with tears? Mine shall be spent,
Friar. There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.
Mother. Alack the day, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead!
2. Mus. Pray you put up your dagger, and put out your wit.
is 'music with her silver sound' because musicians have no
2. Mus. Hang him, Jack! Come, we'll in here, tarry for the
3. Watch. Here is a friar that trembles, sighs, and weeps.
Prince. Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.
Chief Watch. Here is a friar, and slaughter'd Romeo's man,
Capulet, heads of two houses at variance with each other.
Ben. Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?
with his last, the fisher with his pencil and the painter
An I might live to see thee married once, I have my wish.
thou loves me, let the porter let in Susan Grindstone and
1. Serv. You are look'd for and call'd for, ask'd for and
Rom. [aside] Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?
Rom. With love's light wings did I o'erperch these walls;
Friar. That's my good son! But where hast thou been then?
flirt-gills; I am none of his skains-mates. And thou must
Peter. I saw no man use you at his pleasure. If I had, my
behaviour, as they say; for the gentlewoman is young; and
Jul. Now, good sweet nurse- O Lord, why look'st thou sad?
foot, and a body, though they be not to be talk'd on, yet
Thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no
Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair,
Cap. How now, my headstrong? Where have you been gadding?
Lady. Hold, take these keys and fetch more spices, nurse.
Cap. Come, stir, stir, stir! The second cock hath crow'd,
Verona. A churchyard; in it the monument of the Capulets.
Boy. This is the place. There, where the torch doth burn.
Chief Watch. Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain;
Greg. To move is to stir, and to be valiant is to stand.
Samp. My naked weapon is out. Quarrel! I will back thee.
1. Serv. Where's Potpan, that he helps not to take away?
3. Serv. We cannot be here and there too. Cheerly, boys!
Jul. Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.
Jul. What's he that follows there, that would not dance?
courageous captain of compliments. He fights as you sing
buy the fee simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.
Lady. Well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death
She [drinks and] falls upon her bed within the curtains.
Father. For shame, bring Juliet forth; her lord is come.
iron wit, and put up my iron dagger. Answer me like men.
Enter [some of the Watch,] with Romeo's Man [Balthasar].
Greg. Ay, while you live, draw your neck out of collar.
Samp. Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads.
Samp. Let us take the law of our sides; let them begin.
Wife. Nurse, where's my daughter? Call her forth to me.
Rom. Would'st thou withdraw it? For what purpose, love?
Friar. The grey-ey'd morn smiles on the frowning night,
For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part;
Friar. Come, come with me, and we will make short work;
Tybalt under Romeo's arm thrusts Mercutio in, and flies
Friar. Romeo, come forth; come forth, thou fearful man.
Friar. Hark, how they knock! Who's there? Romeo, arise;
Rom. More light and light- more dark and dark our woes!
Lady. Ay, sir; but she will none, she gives you thanks.
Par. Thou wrong'st it more than tears with that report.
Nurse. See where she comes from shrift with merry look.
Cap. Go, nurse, go with her. We'll to church to-morrow.
Nurse. She's dead, deceas'd; she's dead! Alack the day!
Friar. Peace, ho, for shame! Confusion's cure lives not
full of woe.' O, play me some merry dump to comfort me.
Bal. [aside] For all this same, I'll hide me hereabout.
Enter Friar [Laurence], with lanthorn, crow, and spade.
Bal. Here's one, a friend, and one that knows you well.
Tyb. What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health!
Enter Capulet, County Paris, and [Servant] -the Clown.
Come, go with me. [To Servant, giving him a paper] Go,
Nurse. Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace!
O'er courtiers' knees, that dream on cursies straight;
Such as would please. 'Tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone!
Jul. What man art thou that, thus bescreen'd in night,
Rom. I have night's cloak to hide me from their sight;
Rom. Th' exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine.
Rom. Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast!
Nay, come, I pray thee speak. Good, good nurse, speak.
Sweet, sweet, Sweet nurse, tell me, what says my love?
tailor for wearing his new doublet before Easter, with
Mer. Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch. Marry, 'tis enough.
Now, nurse, what news? What hast thou there? the cords
Jul. O, break, my heart! poor bankrout, break at once!
Rom. How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?
Fellow. Things for the cook, sir; but I know not what.
Cap. Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail,
Why 'silver sound'? Why 'music with her silver sound'?
1. Mus. Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.
Par. Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew
Rom. So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that.
And know their spring, their head, their true descent;
Which, but their children's end, naught could remove,
Which then most sought where most might not be found,
For then she could stand high-lone; nay, by th' rood,
Rom. What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?
Jul. By whose direction found'st thou out this place?
Love goes toward love as schoolboys from their books;
Good night, good night! Parting is such sweet sorrow,
Nurse. This afternoon, sir? Well, she shall be there.
Jul. The clock struck nine when I did send the nurse;
Jul. How art thou out of breath when thou hast breath
Friar. Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.
Mer. Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze.
Tyb. Well, peace be with you, sir. Here comes my man.
Mer. But I'll be hang'd, sir, if he wear your livery.
Tyb. Thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him here,
Come, gentle night; come, loving, black-brow'd night;
Rom. Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel.
Who knocks so hard? Whence come you? What's your will
Nurse. O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps;
Why railest thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth?
Nurse. O Lord, I could have stay'd here all the night
An you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets,
Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble-
Nurse. They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.
(Strange dream that gives a dead man leave to think!)
Prince. What fear is this which startles in our ears?
Cap. O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!
Prince. Then say it once what thou dost know in this.
Prince. This letter doth make good the friar's words,
Prince. A glooming peace this morning with it brings.
Mercutio, kinsman to the Prince and friend to Romeo.
What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.
Tyb. What, drawn, and talk of peace? I hate the word
M. Wife. Thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe.
Rom. She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste;
hath here writ. I must to the learned. In good time!
Ben. Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning;
Wife. Well, think of marriage now. Younger than you,
Mer. Tut! dun's the mouse, the constable's own word!
Rom. In bed asleep, while they do dream things true.
Through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love;
Cap. Welcome, gentlemen! Ladies that have their toes
2. Cap. 'Tis more, 'tis more! His son is elder, sir;
For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,
Jul. Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in pray'r.
Rom. O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do!
By her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh,
Jul. How cam'st thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?
Jul. Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.
But love from love, towards school with heavy looks.
Jul. I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,
Rom. And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget,
Check'ring the Eastern clouds with streaks of light;
Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign.
Friar. Wisely, and slow. They stumble that run fast.
very pin of his heart cleft with the blind bow-boy's
Nurse. Peter, take my fan, and go before, and apace.
Couple it with something; make it a word and a blow.
Mer. Could you not take some occasion without giving
Ben. Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo's hand did stay.
With thy black mantle till strange love, grown bold,
Jul. Ay me! what news? Why dost thou wring thy hands
Nurse. Ah, weraday! he's dead, he's dead, he's dead!
These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old.
And Tybalt's dead, that would have slain my husband.
Nurse. Ah sir! ah sir! Well, death's the end of all.
Fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit,
Rom. Farewell, farewell! One kiss, and I'll descend.
Lady. So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend
Lady. Find thou the means, and I'll find such a man.
Lady. Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child;
Cap. Soft! take me with you, take me with you, wife.
Jul. Not proud you have, but thankful that you have.
Alack, alack, that heaven should practise stratagems
Nurse. And from my soul too; else beshrew them both.
Enter Father Capulet, Mother, Nurse, and Servingmen,
Mother. No, not till Thursday. There is time enough.
Par. Have I thought long to see this morning's face,
Rom. There is thy gold- worse poison to men's souls,
Enter Paris and his Page with flowers and [a torch].
Par. Give me thy torch, boy. Hence, and stand aloof.
From this world-wearied flesh. Eyes, look your last!
Friar. Stay then; I'll go alone. Fear comes upon me.
Is guilty of this lamentable chance! The lady stirs.
Boy. He came with flowers to strew his lady's grave;
That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love!
Cap. What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!
Wife. A crutch, a crutch! Why call you for a sword?
Mon. Thou villain Capulet!- Hold me not, let me go.
Ben. See, where he comes. So please you step aside,
Rom. Not having that which having makes them short.
Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires;
Wife. This is the matter- Nurse, give leave awhile,
Jul. And stint thou too, I pray thee, nurse, say I.
I would say thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy teat.
Nurse. Nay, he's a flower, in faith- a very flower.
Too rude, too boist'rous, and it pricks like thorn.
Mer. If love be rough with you, be rough with love.
Ben. This wind you talk of blows us from ourselves.
Cap. What, man? 'Tis not so much, 'tis not so much!
Cap. Why, how now, kinsman? Wherefore storm you so?
Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.
Jul. Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
Rom. Then move not while my prayer's effect I take.
Jul. Then have my lips the sin that they have took.
That fair for which love groan'd for and would die,
And she steal love's sweet bait from fearful hooks.
The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars
Jul. O, swear not by the moon, th' inconstant moon,
Jul. I gave thee mine before thou didst request it;
Rom. A thousand times the worse, to want thy light!
In plants, herbs, stones, and their true qualities;
Nor aught so good but, strain'd from that fair use,
And art thou chang'd? Pronounce this sentence then:
Mer. The slip, sir, the slip. Can you not conceive?
Mer. Come between us, good Benvolio! My wits faint.
Nurse. Now God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir.
Nurse. Lord, how my head aches! What a head have I!
For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.
Rom. This day's black fate on moe days doth depend;
Cap. Wife. Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother's child!
Jul. What devil art thou that dost torment me thus?
Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name
Thy fault our law calls death; but the kind Prince,
Friar. I'll give thee armour to keep off that word;
Friar. Arise; one knocks. Good Romeo, hide thyself.
Since birth and heaven and earth, all three do meet
Killing that love which thou hast vow'd to cherish;
Par. My lord, I would that Thursday were to-morrow.
Jul. Art thou gone so, my lord, my love, my friend?
Rom. I doubt it not; and all these woes shall serve
What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live.
Therefore have done. Some grief shows much of love;
Jul. [aside] Villain and he be many miles asunder.-
Lady. We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not.
Lady. Here comes your father. Tell him so yourself,
Out, you green-sickness carrion I out, you baggage!
Par. Poor soul, thy face is much abus'd with tears.
Friar. My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.
Come weep with me- past hope, past cure, past help!
Jul. Tell me not, friar, that thou hear'st of this,
Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death;
Friar. Hold! Get you gone, be strong and prosperous
And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife.
Jul. Ay, those attires are best; but, gentle nurse,
Which, well thou knowest, is cross and full of sin.
Fellow. I have a head, sir, that will find out logs
What, dress'd, and in your clothes, and down again?
Hath Death lain with thy wife. See, there she lies,
Cap. Despis'd, distressed, hated, martyr'd, kill'd!
1. Mus. Faith, we may put up our pipes and be gone.
With speedy help doth lend redress.'         [Exit.
Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell.
Enter Romeo, and Balthasar with a torch, a mattock,
Live, and be prosperous; and farewell, good fellow.
Page. O Lord, they fight! I will go call the watch.
Friar. I hear some noise. Lady, come from that nest
Chief Watch. A great suspicion! Stay the friar too.
Cap. What should it be, that they so shriek abroad?
Friar. I will be brief, for my short date of breath
Will they not hear? What, ho! you men, you beasts,
Exeunt [all but Montague, his Wife, and Benvolio].
Ben. It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?
With more of thine. This love that thou hast shown
Rom. Well, in that hit you miss. She'll not be hit
One desperate grief cures with another's languish.
And she shall scant show well that now seems best.
And yet, to my teen be it spoken, I have but four-
Shake, quoth the dovehouse! 'Twas no need, I trow,
O'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees;
Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are.
You are welcome, gentlemen! Come, musicians, play.
Rom. O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
They pray; grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.
But passion lends them power, time means, to meet,
Ben. He ran this way, and leapt this orchard wall.
But soft! What light through yonder window breaks?
That birds would sing and think it were not night.
Jul. I would not for the world they saw thee here.
Rom. By love, that first did prompt me to enquire.
Jul. Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face;
Jul. I will not fail. 'Tis twenty years till then.
Friar. Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift
Rom. Then plainly know my heart's dear love is set
the goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.
Nurse. Is your man secret? Did you ne'er hear say,
O, she is lame! Love's heralds should be thoughts,
Nurse. Then hie you hence to Friar Laurence' cell;
Marry, go before to field, he'll be your follower!
Prince. Where are the vile beginners of this fray?
With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bow'd-
My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding;
Come, night; come, Romeo; come, thou day in night;
But wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?
In that word's death; no words can that woe sound.
Take up those cords. Poor ropes, you are beguil'd,
Jul. O, find him! give this ring to my true knight
Rom. What less than doomsday is the Prince's doom?
Hadst thou no poison mix'd, no sharp-ground knife,
Rom. Not I; unless the breath of heartsick groans,
But thou slewest Tybalt. There art thou happy too.
The law, that threat'ned death, becomes thy friend
Give me thy hand. 'Tis late. Farewell; good night.
Nurse. Your lady mother is coming to your chamber.
Jul. O Fortune, Fortune! all men call thee fickle.
'Proud'- and 'I thank you'- and 'I thank you not'-
Cap. Hang thee, young baggage! disobedient wretch!
Graze where you will, you shall not house with me.
Jul. O God!- O nurse, how shall this be prevented?
Jul. Well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much.
Par. Thy face is mine, and thou hast sland'red it.
Jul. O, shut the door! and when thou hast done so,
Friar. Hold, then. Go home, be merry, give consent
Jul. Farewell! God knows when we shall meet again.
To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
Lady. Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time;
1. Mus. Then will I give you the serving-creature.
And hire those horses. I'll be with thee straight.
Laur. This same should be the voice of Friar John.
Rom. Wilt thou provoke me? Then have at thee, boy!
Friar. Saint Francis be my speed! how oft to-night
Friar. Bliss be upon you! Tell me, good my friend,
What's here? A cup, clos'd in my true love's hand?
Benvolio, nephew to Montague, and friend to Romeo
Doth with their death bury their parents' strife.
Samp. Gregory, on my word, we'll not carry coals.
Enter two other Servingmen [Abram and Balthasar].
Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs;
Rom. Alas that love, whose view is muffled still,
Rom. A right good markman! And she's fair I love.
Ben. A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.
From Love's weak childish bow she lives unharm'd.
Cap. And too soon marr'd are those so early made.
Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light.
Wife. Enough of this. I pray thee hold thy peace.
Wife. Speak briefly, can you like of Paris' love?
Nurse. Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.
Mer. And, to sink in it, should you burthen love-
Of this sir-reverence love, wherein thou stick'st
She I'll swear hath corns. Am I come near ye now?
This trick may chance to scathe you. I know what.
Be quiet, or- More light, more light!- For shame!
Tyb. Patience perforce with wilful choler meeting
Nurse. Madam, your mother craves a word with you.
Cry but 'Ay me!' pronounce but 'love' and 'dove';
Of that tongue's utterance, yet I know the sound.
Rom. Neither, fair saint, if either thee dislike.
Jul. If they do see thee, they will murther thee.
Than twenty of their swords! Look thou but sweet,
For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night.
Ere one can say 'It lightens.' Sweet, good night!
Jul. I come, anon.- But if thou meanest not well,
Jul. 'Tis almost morning. I would have thee gone-
Rom. That last is true-the sweeter rest was mine.
Friar. Holy Saint Francis! What a change is here!
Rom. And stay, good nurse, behind the abbey wall.
Nurse. Ay, a thousand times. [Exit Romeo.] Peter!
Which ten times faster glide than the sun's beams
Fie, how my bones ache! What a jaunce have I had!
Jul. I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news.
Nurse. Jesu, what haste! Can you not stay awhile?
Jul. I' faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.
Nurse. Have you got leave to go to shrift to-day?
Jul. Hie to high fortune! Honest nurse, farewell.
Jul. As much to him, else is his thanks too much.
Stand not amaz'd. The Prince will doom thee death
I beg for justice, which thou, Prince, must give.
Mon. Not Romeo, Prince; he was Mercutio's friend;
And she brings news; and every tongue that speaks
Alack the day! he's gone, he's kill'd, he's dead!
Jul. O God! Did Romeo's hand shed Tybalt's blood?
Jul. Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
That villain cousin would have kill'd my husband.
Come, cords; come, nurse. I'll to my wedding bed;
Rom. Father, what news? What is the Prince's doom
Friar. A gentler judgment vanish'd from his lips-
Rom. 'Tis torture, and not mercy. Heaven is here,
Friar. Thou fond mad man, hear me a little speak.
Murder'd her kinsman. O, tell me, friar, tell me,
In thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose.
Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit.
Cap. Monday! ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon.
Lady. That is because the traitor murderer lives.
Jul. Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands.
Sailing in this salt flood; the winds, thy sighs,
Cap. How, how, how, how, choplogic? What is this?
But fettle your fine joints 'gainst Thursday next
My fingers itch. Wife, we scarce thought us blest
Par. That may be must be, love, on Thursday next.
O'ercover'd quite with dead men's rattling bones,
And this shall free thee from this present shame,
Cap. Why, I am glad on't. This is well. Stand up.
Mother. What, are you busy, ho? Need you my help?
I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins
Lies fest'ring in his shroud; where, as they say,
And shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth,
And, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone
Cap. No, not a whit. What, I have watch'd ere now
Mother. Accurs'd, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!
1. Mus. Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.
O, an you will have me live, play 'Heart's ease.'
Rom. If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
Apoth. Such mortal drugs I have; but Mantua's law
The world is not thy friend, nor the world's law;
Rom. Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.
Have my old feet stumbled at graves! Who's there?
Bal. It doth so, holy sir; and there's my master,
Prince. Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,
And threat'ned me with death, going in the vault,
Where is the County's page that rais'd the watch?
Therefore, if thou art moved, thou runn'st away.
Cank'red with peace, to part your cank'red hate.
Came more and more, and fought on part and part,
Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow,
Here's much to do with hate, but more with love.
Being vex'd, a sea nourish'd with lovers' tears.
That, when she dies, with beauty dies her store.
Whipp'd and tormented and- God-den, good fellow.
Serv. God gi' go-den. I pray, sir, can you read?
Rom. Ay, If I know the letters and the language.
Rom. Indeed I should have ask'd you that before.
Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.
Nurse. Now, by my maidenhead at twelve year old,
Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit;
Nurse. Yes, madam. Yet I cannot choose but laugh
'Yea,' quoth my husband, 'fall'st upon thy face?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age;
Wilt thou not, Jule?' It stinted, and said 'Ay.'
Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nurs'd.
Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.
Rom. Give me a torch. I am not for this ambling.
Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.
Mer. O, then I see Queen Mab hath been with you.
O'er ladies' lips, who straight on kisses dream,
That presses them and learns them first to bear,
hands, and they unwash'd too, 'tis a foul thing.
Rom. Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?
Rom. Sin from my lips? O trespass sweetly urg'd!
Jul. Come hither, nurse. What is yond gentleman?
Nurse. Marry, that, I think, be young Petruchio.
Ben. Come, he hath hid himself among these trees
Mer. If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
As that vast shore wash'd with the farthest sea,
And I will take thy word. Yet, if thou swear'st,
And therefore thou mayst think my haviour light;
Than those that have more cunning to be strange.
I should have been more strange, I must confess,
That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops-
Jul. Well, do not swear. Although I joy in thee,
Good night, good night! As sweet repose and rest
Jul. What satisfaction canst thou have to-night?
Jul. Hist! Romeo, hist! O for a falconer's voice
How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night,
If e'er thou wast thyself, and these woes thine,
Thy love did read by rote, that could not spell.
Mer. Any man that can write may answer a letter.
butt-shaft; and is he a man to encounter Tybalt?
Ben. Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.
Of this day's journey, and from nine till twelve
My back o' t' other side,- ah, my back, my back!
Which, as they kiss, consume. The sweetest honey
Jul. Conceit, more rich in matter than in words,
They are but beggars that can count their worth;
Rom. Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee
That thou hast done me; therefore turn and draw.
Could draw to part them, was stout Tybalt slain;
Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,
His fault concludes but what the law should end,
Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses.
Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night,
Nurse. I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes,
Jul. O serpent heart, hid with a flow'ring face!
Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring!
Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death,
Why followed not, when she said 'Tybalt's dead,'
For Juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand!
Rom. Spakest thou of Juliet? How is it with her?
Lady. I will, and know her mind early to-morrow;
In all respects by me; nay more, I doubt it not.
No nightingale. Look, love, what envious streaks
Therefore stay yet; thou need'st not to be gone.
Some say the lark and loathed toad chang'd eyes;
Jul. Then, window, let day in, and let life out.
As that the villain lives which slaughter'd him.
Jul. Now by Saint Peter's Church, and Peter too,
Cap. When the sun sets the air doth drizzle dew,
Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is
How? Will she none? Doth she not give us thanks?
Lady. Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word.
Friar. On Thursday, sir? The time is very short.
Par. Come you to make confession to this father?
Being spoke behind your back, than to your face.
God join'd my heart and Romeo's, thou our hands;
That cop'st with death himself to scape from it;
Where serpents are; chain me with roaring bears,
No warmth, no breath, shall testify thou livest;
To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead.
Cap. Well, be may chance to do some good on her.
I'll play the housewife for this once. What, ho!
All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.
Why, love, I say! madam! sweetheart! Why, bride!
What, not a word? You take your pennyworths now!
Sleep for a week; for the next night, I warrant,
Friar. Come, is the bride ready to go to church?
And leave him all. Life, living, all is Death's.
Par. Beguil'd, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!
Had part in this fair maid! now heaven hath all,
1. Mus. Not a dump we! 'Tis no time to play now.
Rom. Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor.
Seal'd up the doors, and would not let us forth,
(Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves)
Or, wanting that, with tears distill'd by moans.
And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs.
That murd'red my love's cousin- with which grief
Rom. I must indeed; and therefore came I hither.
Death, that hath suck'd the honey of thy breath,
Grief of my son's exile hath stopp'd her breath.
And she, there dead, that Romeo's faithful wife.
Banish'd the new-made bridegroom from this city;
Prince. We still have known thee for a holy man.
Bal. I brought my master news of Juliet's death;
Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things;
The fearful passage of their death-mark'd love,
Greg. But thou art not quickly moved to strike.
from the wall and thrust his maids to the wall.
Ben. I do but keep the peace. Put up thy sword,
M. Wife. O, where is Romeo? Saw you him to-day?
Being purg'd, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes;
Ben. I aim'd so near when I suppos'd you lov'd.
These happy masks that kiss fair ladies' brows,
Being black puts us in mind they hide the fair.
She hath not seen the change of fourteen years;
Whose names are written there, and to them say,
And these, who, often drown'd, could never die,
Ben. Tut! you saw her fair, none else being by,
But in that crystal scales let there be weigh'd
We must talk in secret. Nurse, come back again;
Come Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.
'Yea,' quoth he, 'dost thou fall upon thy face?
Wife. What say you? Can you love the gentleman?
This precious book of love, this unbound lover,
Jul. I'll look to like, if looking liking move;
Mer. Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.
Rom. A torch for me! Let wantons light of heart
We waste our lights in vain, like lamps by day.
Rom. And we mean well, in going to this masque;
Her whip, of cricket's bone; the lash, of film;
Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes,
And being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two
And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish, hairs,
This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
Unplagu'd with corns will have a bout with you.
More light, you knaves! and turn the tables up,
And quench the fire, the room is grown too hot.
Ah, sirrah, this unlook'd-for sport comes well.
Some five-and-twenty years, and then we mask'd.
The measure done, I'll watch her place of stand
Did my heart love till now? Forswear it, sight!
I'll make you quiet; what!- Cheerly, my hearts!
Turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out.
He heareth not, he stirreth not, be moveth not;
Rom. He jests at scars that never felt a wound.
She speaks, yet she says nothing. What of that?
Jul. My ears have yet not drunk a hundred words
May prove a beauteous flow'r when next we meet.
Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite;
Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest!
From forth day's path and Titan's fiery wheels.
With baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers.
Friar. God pardon sin! Wast thou with Rosaline?
Women may fall when there's no strength in men.
Rom. I pray thee chide not. She whom I love now
Ben. Not to his father's. I spoke with his man.
Mer. I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.
And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair,
Jul. Here's such a coil! Come, what says Romeo?
Friar. These violent delights have violent ends
And in their triumph die, like fire and powder,
Be heap'd like mine, and that thy skill be more
This neighbour air, and let rich music's tongue
Tyb. Follow me close, for I will speak to them.
Where is my page? Go, villain, fetch a surgeon.
came you between us? I was hurt under your arm.
Or I shall faint. A plague o' both your houses!
Citizen. Which way ran he that kill'd Mercutio?
Nurse. O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had!
Jul. What storm is this that blows so contrary?
Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom!
My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain;
Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt's death
Nurse. Weeping and wailing over Tybalt's corse.
Is death misterm'd. Calling death 'banishment,'
And turn'd that black word death to banishment.
Blubb'ring and weeping, weeping and blubbering.
Hast thou slain Tybalt? Wilt thou slay thyself?
To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,
Nurse. Here is a ring she bid me give you, sir.
Madam, good night. Commend me to your daughter.
Therefore we'll have some half a dozen friends,
And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?
Cap. Well, get you gone. A Thursday be it then.
Jul. Wilt thou be gone? It is not yet near day.
Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.
Jul. O, think'st thou we shall ever meet again?
Either my eyesight fails, or thou look'st pale.
That is renown'd for faith? Be fickle, Fortune,
Jul. Who is't that calls? It is my lady mother.
Lady. Evermore weeping for your cousin's death?
But much of grief shows still some want of wit.
Would none but I might venge my cousin's death!
Lady. Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn
How now? a conduit, girl? What, still in tears?
Is she not proud? Doth she not count her blest,
I tell thee what- get thee to church a Thursday
Cap. And why, my Lady Wisdom? Hold your tongue,
Proportion'd as one's thought would wish a man-
Romeo is banish'd; and all the world to nothing
That he dares ne'er come back to challenge you;
Having displeas'd my father, to Laurence' cell,
Friar. You say you do not know the lady's mind.
Par. Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt's death,
Jul. That is no slander, sir, which is a truth;
Friar. Hold, daughter. I do spy a kind of hope,
Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,
Let not the nurse lie with thee in thy chamber.
Jul. No, madam; we have cull'd such necessaries
Get you to bed! Faith, you'll be sick to-morrow
Cap. Mass, and well said; a merry whoreson, ha!
That you shall rest but little. God forgive me!
Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff;
Your part in her you could not keep from death,
She's not well married that lives married long,
But she's best married that dies married young.
Friar. Sir, go you in; and, madam, go with him;
Nurse. Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up!
Pet. Pretty too! What say you, James Soundpost?
Let's see for means. O mischief, thou art swift
Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.'
As signal that thou hear'st something approach.
Page. [aside] I am almost afraid to stand alone
Give me the light. Upon thy life I charge thee,
Whate'er thou hearest or seest, stand all aloof
But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger
Rom. In faith, I will. Let me peruse this face.
Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain
The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss
Here's to my love! [Drinks.] O true apothecary!
Yea, noise? Then I'll be brief. O happy dagger!
This is thy sheath; there rest, and let me die.
Being the time the potion's force should cease.
Their course of love, the tidings of her death;
Came to this vault to die, and lie with Juliet.
Have lost a brace of kinsmen. All are punish'd.
A pair of star-cross'd lovers take their life;
Samp. A dog of the house of Montague moves me.
Greg. They must take it in sense that feel it.
Prince. Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,
With purple fountains issuing from your veins!
Have thrice disturb'd the quiet of our streets
Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.
Mon. Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
Who, nothing hurt withal, hiss'd him in scorn.
While we were interchanging thrusts and blows,
With tears augmenting the fresh morning's dew,
Where shall we dine? O me! What fray was here?
Love is a smoke rais'd with the fume of sighs;
Ben. Tell me in sadness, who is that you love?
Rom. O, teach me how I should forget to think!
Where I may read who pass'd that passing fair?
The earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she;
May stand in number, though in reck'ning none.
Rom. Your plantain leaf is excellent for that.
Rom. Not mad, but bound more than a madman is;
Rom. I'll go along, no such sight to be shown,
I have rememb'red me, thou's hear our counsel.
Nurse. Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.
Nurse. An honour? Were not I thine only nurse,
And find delight writ there with beauty's pen;
The fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride
That book in many's eyes doth share the glory,
That in gold clasps locks in the golden story;
Nurse. No less? Nay, bigger! Women grow by men
Rom. Not I, believe me. You have dancing shoes
If thou art Dun, we'll draw thee from the mire
Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,
And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
Will now deny to dance? She that makes dainty,
A hall, a hall! give room! and foot it, girls.
And, touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.
Tyb. This, by his voice, should be a Montague.
Fetch me my rapier, boy. What, dares the slave
Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
You'll not endure him? God shall mend my soul!
To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.
Chor. Now old desire doth in his deathbed lie,
Of some strange nature, letting it there stand
That thou her maid art far more fair than she.
What if her eyes were there, they in her head?
Would through the airy region stream so bright
As glorious to this night, being o'er my head,
Jul. O Romeo, Romeo! wherefore art thou Romeo?
And the place death, considering who thou art,
And what love can do, that dares love attempt.
Rom. Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
I'll frown, and be perverse, and say thee nay,
So thou wilt woo; but else, not for the world.
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath,
And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine
That I shall say good night till it be morrow.
For naught so vile that on the earth doth live
Being tasted, slays all senses with the heart.
Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.
But where unbruised youth with unstuff'd brain
Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.
Friar. For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.
To turn your households' rancour to pure love.
Rom. O, let us hence! I stand on sudden haste.
Be shriv'd and married. Here is for thy pains.
Rom. I warrant thee my man's as true as steel.
And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.
Must climb a bird's nest soon when it is dark.
Friar. So smile the heavens upon this holy act
Ben. I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire.
Therefore farewell. I see thou knowest me not.
Ben. Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.
With piercing steel at bold Mercutio's breast;
And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
Affection makes him false, he speaks not true.
Else, when he is found, that hour is his last.
And may not wear them. O, here comes my nurse,
(God save the mark!) here on his manly breast.
When I, thy three-hours wife, have mangled it?
Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.
Rom. Ha, banishment? Be merciful, say 'death';
Much more than death. Do not say 'banishment.'
Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin;
No sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean,
Friar. O, then I see that madmen have no ears.
Friar. Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.
For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead.
Rom. Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.
Cap. Things have fall'n out, sir, so unluckily
That we have had no time to move our daughter.
Look you, she lov'd her kinsman Tybalt dearly,
'Tis very late; she'll not come down to-night.
Par. These times of woe afford no tune to woo.
Cap. Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender
Jul. Yond light is not daylight; I know it, I.
O, now be gone! More light and light it grows.
Then weep no more. I'll send to one in Mantua,
Who, raging with thy tears and they with them,
But thankful even for hate that is meant love.
Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,
Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly train'd,
What say'st thou? Hast thou not a word of joy?
Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
Look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.
Jul. The tears have got small victory by that,
I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,
When presently through all thy veins shall run
Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault
Jul. Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!
Cap. Send for the County. Go tell him of this.
I'll have this knot knit up to-morrow morning.
Jul. I met the youthful lord at Laurence' cell
This is as't should be. Let me see the County.
Jul. Nurse, will you go with me into my closet
Against to-morrow. My heart is wondrous light,
Get thee to bed, and rest; for thou hast need.
Lest in this marriage he should be dishonour'd
And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud.,
The curfew bell hath rung, 'tis three o'clock.
Make haste! The bridegroom he is come already:
He'll fright you up, i' faith. Will it not be?
Cap. Ha! let me see her. Out alas! she's cold,
And cruel Death hath catch'd it from my sight!
Move them no more by crossing their high will.
Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar?
Man. Then she is well, and nothing can be ill.
Green earthen pots, bladders, and musty seeds,
Remnants of packthread, and old cakes of roses
And that the trunk may be discharg'd of breath
Rom. Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness
Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.
Within this three hours will fair Juliet wake.
Nightly shall be to strew, thy grave and weep.
The boy gives warning something doth approach.
Bal. I will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.
Fly hence and leave me. Think upon these gone;
Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth,
A grave? O, no, a lanthorn, slaught'red youth,
Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interr'd.
Have they been merry! which their keepers call
Arms, take your last embrace! and, lips, O you
What torch is yond that vainly lends his light
Stay not to question, for the watch is coming.
She stabs herself and falls [on Romeo's body].
Mon. Alas, my liege, my wife is dead to-night!
Mon. O thou untaught! what manners is in this,
Doth make against me, of this direful murther;
Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet;
Prince. Give me the letter. I will look on it.
Samp. I mean, an we be in choler, we'll draw.
Put up your swords. You know not what you do.
Ben. Here were the servants of your adversary
And yours, close fighting ere I did approach.
Till the Prince came, who parted either part.
Ben. Madam, an hour before the worshipp'd sun
Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air
To hear true shrift. Come, madam, let's away,
Should without eyes see pathways to his will!
Rom. Bid a sick man in sadness make his will.
In penalty alike; and 'tis not hard, I think,
Cap. But saying o'er what I have said before:
Par. Younger than she are happy mothers made.
One more, most welcome, makes my number more.
Which, on more view of many, mine, being one,
Compare her face with some that I shall show,
Susan and she (God rest all Christian souls!)
On Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen;
And she was wean'd (I never shall forget it),
The pretty wretch left crying, and said 'Ay.'
To think it should leave crying and say 'Ay.'
Wife. Verona's summer hath not such a flower.
This night you shall behold him at our feast.
To soar with his light feathers; and so bound
Rom. Is love a tender thing? It is too rough,
Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.
Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels;
Five times in that ere once in our five wits.
Her wagon spokes made of long spinners' legs,
Her collars, of the moonshine's wat'ry beams;
And in this state she 'gallops night by night
Cap. Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone.
Well said, my hearts!- You are a princox- go!
I nurs'd her daughter that you talk'd withal.
Ben. Away, be gone; the sport is at the best.
Jul. What's he that now is going out of door?
And, on my life, hath stol'n him home to bed.
Ben. An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.
Mer. This cannot anger him. 'Twould anger him
And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit
'To seek him here that means not to be found.
To twinkle in their spheres till they return.
The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,
Dost thou love me, I know thou wilt say 'Ay';
Thou mayst prove false. At lovers' perjuries,
But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true
Thy purpose marriage, send me word to-morrow,
And follow thee my lord throughout the world.
Rom. Let me stand here till thou remember it.
Enter Friar, [Laurence] alone, with a basket.
The day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry,
The earth that's nature's mother is her tomb.
But to the earth some special good doth give;
In man as well as herbs- grace and rude will;
I have forgot that name, and that name's woe.
Rom. I'll tell thee ere thou ask it me again.
And all combin'd, save what thou must combine
Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,
Thy old groans ring yet in mine ancient ears.
Rom. Thou chid'st me oft for loving Rosaline.
Doth grace for grace and love for love allow.
immortal passado! the punto reverse! the hay.
Farewell. Be trusty, and I'll quit thy pains.
Rom. Ay, nurse; what of that? Both with an R.
Perchance she cannot meet him. That's not so.
Therefore do nimble-pinion'd doves draw Love,
If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news
Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest!
Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks:
But you shall bear the burthen soon at night.
Therefore love moderately: long love doth so;
For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone
Ben. We talk here in the public haunt of men.
No better term than this: thou art a villain.
Rom. Draw, Benvolio; beat down their weapons.
That late thou gavest me; for Mercutio's soul
Of my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true,
Prince. Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?
Who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point,
And all those twenty could but kill one life.
Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?
I have an interest in your hate's proceeding,
Therefore use none. Let Romeo hence in haste,
Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.
It best agrees with night. Come, civil night,
That all the world will be in love with night
This torture should be roar'd in dismal hell.
Or those eyes shut that make thee answer 'I.'
Vile earth, to earth resign; end motion here,
For 'tis a throne where honour may be crown'd
But with a rearward following Tybalt's death,
And world's exile is death. Then 'banishment'
This may flies do, when I from this must fly;
Where is she? and how doth she! and what says
And now falls on her bed, and then starts up,
There art thou happy. Tybalt would kill thee,
Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
But look thou stay not till the watch be set,
Where thou shalt live till we can find a time
Rom. But that a joy past joy calls out on me,
Of my child's love. I think she will be rul'd
And bid her (mark you me?) on Wednesday next-
That pierc'd the fearful hollow of thine ear.
Rom. It was the lark, the herald of the morn;
Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day
Rom. Let me be ta'en, let me be put to death.
Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wills it so.
How is't, my soul? Let's talk; it is not day.
Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,
Hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the day!
Rom. And trust me, love, in my eye so do you.
Jul. Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.
Jul. And joy comes well in such a needy time.
Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.
For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,
Good Prudence. Smatter with your gossips, go!
For, by my soul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee,
Your first is dead- or 'twere as good he were
Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue
Which she hath prais'd him with above compare
Jul. To answer that, I should confess to you.
Par. So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.
And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo's seal'd,
Jul. O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,
With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls;
Shall keep his native progress, but surcease;
And in this borrowed likeness of shrunk death
Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes
In this resolve. I'll send a friar with speed
Jul. Where I have learnt me to repent the sin
Since this same wayward girl is so reclaim'd.
And let the nurse this night sit up with you;
No, No! This shall forbid it. Lie thou there.
I fear it is; and yet methinks it should not,
Call Peter; he will show thee where they are.
I'll go and chat with Paris. Hie, make haste,
Life and these lips have long been separated.
But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,
Dead art thou, dead! alack, my child is dead,
For 'twas your heaven she should be advanc'd;
And breath'd such life with kisses in my lips
Thou knowest my lodging. Get me ink and paper
O, this same thought did but forerun my need,
As will disperse itself through all the veins
Then be not poor, but break it and take this.
And drink it off, and if you had the strength
To Juliet's grave; for there must I use thee.
Holding thine ear close to the hollow ground.
In dear employment. Therefore hence, be gone.
Rom. Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,
And in despite I'll cram thee with more food.
Good gentle youth, tempt not a desp'rate man.
This vault a feasting presence full of light.
Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?
With worms that are thy chambermaids. O, here
Bal. As I did sleep under this yew tree here,
Alack, alack, what blood is this which stains
And steep'd in blood? Ah, what an unkind hour
Come, go, good Juliet. I dare no longer stay.
Jul. Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.
O churl! drunk all, and left no friendly drop
But the true ground of all these piteous woes
Some 'Juliet,' and some 'Paris'; and all run,
This dagger hath mista'en, for, lo, his house
Prince. Come, Montague; for thou art early up
And lead you even to death. Meantime forbear,
I married them; and their stol'n marriage day
Betroth'd and would have married her perforce
That he should hither come as this dire night
And she, too desperate, would not go with me,
Where's Romeo's man? What can he say in this?
Cap. As rich shall Romeo's by his lady's lie-
Paris, a young Count, kinsman to the Prince.
Chor. Two households, both alike in dignity,
Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean.
From forth the fatal loins of these two foes
Ben. Part, fools! [Beats down their swords.]
Enter Old Capulet in his gown, and his Wife.
That quench the fire of your pernicious rage
Throw your mistempered weapons to the ground
Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.
Mon. Many a morning hath he there been seen,
This love feel I, that feel no love in this.
Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.
Rom. Tut! I have lost myself; I am not here:
And, in strong proof of chastity well arm'd,
She will not stay the siege of loving terms,
Ben. Be rul'd by me: forget to think of her.
Farewell. Thou canst not teach me to forget.
Among fresh female buds shall you this night
And like her most whose merit most shall be;
My house and welcome on their pleasure stay-
Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning;
'Signior Martino and his wife and daughters;
Mine uncle Capulet, his wife, and daughters;
Ben. At this same ancient feast of Capulet's
God forbid! Where's this girl? What, Juliet!
Nurse. Even or odd, of all days in the year,
Sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall.
When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
For even the day before, she broke her brow;
I warrant, an I should live a thousand yeas,
And, pretty fool, it stinted, and said 'Ay.'
I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,
That you are now a maid. Thus then in brief:
So shall you share all that he doth possess,
We'll have no Cupid hoodwink'd with a scarf,
Ben. Come, knock and enter; and no sooner in
Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits
Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose,
Sometimes she driveth o'er a soldier's neck,
And more inconstant than the wind, who wooes
Rom. I fear, too early; for my mind misgives
With this night's revels and expire the term
Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear!
For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.
Tyb. It fits when such a villain is a guest.
You will set cock-a-hoop! you'll be the man!
Cap. Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone;
Jul. My only love, sprung from my only hate!
With tender Juliet match'd, is now not fair.
To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear,
And she as much in love, her means much less
Rom. Can I go forward when my heart is here?
As maids call medlars when they laugh alone.
And for that name, which is no part of thee,
And but thou love me, let them find me here.
Or if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,
Jul. But to be frank and give it thee again.
And with a silk thread plucks it back again,
Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.
Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse.
Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye,
So soon forsaken? Young men's love then lies
Some means to come to shrift this afternoon;
But old folks, many feign as they were dead-
The excuse that thou dost make in this delay
Jul. No, no. But all this did I know before.
To catch my death with jauncing up and down!
Jul. Where is my mother? Why, she is within.
That one short minute gives me in her sight.
Do thou but close our hands with holy words,
Gentlemen, good den. A word with one of you.
Your worship in that sense may call him man.
Tyb. Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries
Mer. O calm, dishonourable, vile submission!
They have made worms' meat of me. I have it,
Rom. This gentleman, the Prince's near ally,
That gallant spirit hath aspir'd the clouds,
Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.
Either thou or I, or both, must go with him.
O Prince! O husband! O, the blood is spill'd
His agile arm beats down their fatal points,
And 'twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm
By their own beauties; or, if love be blind,
Hood my unmann'd blood, bating in my cheeks,
Nurse. It did, it did! alas the day, it did!
Dove-feather'd raven! wolvish-ravening lamb!
So fairly bound? O, that deceit should dwell
Ah, where's my man? Give me some aqua vitae.
And needly will be rank'd with other griefs,
When theirs are dry, for Romeo's banishment.
Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.
Rom. There is no world without Verona walls,
And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.
And sayest thou yet that exile is not death?
Howling attends it! How hast thou the heart,
Rom. O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.
It helps not, it prevails not. Talk no more.
Doth my name lodge? Tell me, that I may sack
Art thou a man? Thy form cries out thou art;
Thy tears are womanish, thy wild acts denote
And thou dismemb'red with thine own defence.
And turns it to exile. There art thou happy.
Beg pardon of the Prince, and call thee back
Rom. How well my comfort is reviv'd by this!
Or by the break of day disguis'd from hence.
Prepare her, wife, against this wedding day.
Farewell, My lord.- Light to my chamber, ho!
Enter Romeo and Juliet aloft, at the Window.
Nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat
Jul. It is, it is! Hie hence, be gone, away!
I must hear from thee every day in the hour,
That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.
What unaccustom'd cause procures her hither?
And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.
Where that same banish'd runagate doth live,
But now I'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.
Jul. Madam, in happy time! What day is that?
I will not marry yet; and when I do, I swear
Jul. Good father, I beseech you on my knees,
To have her match'd; and having now provided
Stuff'd, as they say, with honourable parts,
Look to't, think on't; I do not use to jest.
Thursday is near; lay hand on heart, advise:
I think it best you married with the County.
Romeo's a dishclout to him. An eagle, madam,
Jul. Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend!
Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.
Jul. That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.
Friar. Ah, Juliet, I already know thy grief;
Therefore, out of thy long-experienc'd time,
As that is desperate which we would prevent.
A thing like death to chide away this shame,
Like death when he shuts up the day of life;
Cap. So many guests invite as here are writ.
What, is my daughter gone to Friar Laurence?
They are all forth; well, I will walk myself
Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,
So early waking- what with loathsome smells,
As with a club dash out my desp'rate brains?
But I will watch you from such watching now.
The County will be here with music straight,
Ties up my tongue and will not let me speak.
O child! O child! my soul, and not my child!
Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse;
1. Mus. An you re us and fa us, you note us.
1. Mus. What a pestilent knave is this same?
Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee to-night.
And hereabouts 'a dwells, which late I noted
And fearest to die? Famine is in thy cheeks,
Apoth. Put this in any liquid thing you will
Farewell. Buy food and get thyself in flesh.
Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.
So that my speed to Mantua there was stay'd.
John. I could not send it- here it is again-
The letter was not nice, but full of charge,
Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.
Hold, take this letter. Early in the morning
Gorg'd with the dearest morsel of the earth,
Can vengeance be pursu'd further than death?
He told me Paris should have married Juliet.
And death's pale flag is not advanced there.
For fear of that I still will stay with thee
Come, bitter conduct; come, unsavoury guide!
We see the ground whereon these woes do lie,
Enter Friar [Laurence] and another Watchman.
We took this mattock and this spade from him
That calls our person from our morning rest?
Wife. O me! this sight of death is as a bell
What further woe conspires against mine age?
You, to remove that siege of grief from her,
To help to take her from her borrowed grave,
Came I to take her from her kindred's vault;
But then a noise did scare me from the tomb,
This letter he early bid me give his father,
Sirrah, what made your master in this place?
And the continuance of their parents' rage,
Is now the two hours' traffic of our stage;
On pain of torture, from those bloody hands
And hear the sentence of your moved prince.
To old Freetown, our common judgment place.
Peer'd forth the golden window of the East,
That westward rooteth from the city's side,
And gladly shunn'd who gladly fled from me.
Black and portentous must this humour prove
Ben. My noble uncle, do you know the cause?
Mon. I neither know it nor can learn of him
I'll know his grievance, or be much denied.
Mon. I would thou wert so happy by thy stay
Was that my father that went hence so fast?
Ben. Alas that love, so gentle in his view,
Which thou wilt propagate, to have it prest
She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair,
The precious treasure of his eyesight lost.
Of limping Winter treads, even such delight
Through fair Verona; find those persons out
Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lov'st;
And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.
One fairer than my love? The all-seeing sun
That I will show you shining at this feast,
I bade her come. What, lamb! what ladybird!
Thou knowest my daughter's of a pretty age.
'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years;
Of all the days of the year, upon that day;
To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug!
Wife. Marry, that 'marry' is the very theme
Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke
But, let them measure us by what they will,
Rom. I am too sore enpierced with his shaft
For I am proverb'd with a grandsire phrase,
Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!
Tickling a parson's nose as 'a lies asleep,
That plats the manes of horses in the night
And, being anger'd, puffs away from thence,
Turning his face to the dew-dropping South.
Supper is done, and we shall come too late.
Some consequence, yet hanging in the stars,
How long is't now since last yourself and I
I would not for the wealth of all this town
My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand
We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.
Too early seen unknown, and known too late!
[Climbs the wall and leaps down within it.]
One nickname for her purblind son and heir,
Blind is his love and best befits the dark.
This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep.
Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,
And none but fools do wear it. Cast it off.
Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,
As daylight doth a lamp; her eyes in heaven
Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,
What's in a name? That which we call a rose
Call me but love, and I'll be new baptiz'd;
Fain would I dwell on form- fain, fain deny
What I have spoke; but farewell compliment!
If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully.
But that thou overheard'st, ere I was ware,
And not impute this yielding to light love,
Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.
Come to thy heart as that within my breast!
I hear some noise within. Dear love, adieu!
Rom. O blessed, blessed night! I am afeard,
To cease thy suit and leave me to my grief.
Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,
Rom. It is my soul that calls upon my name.
What is her burying gave, that is her womb;
Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied,
Within the infant rind of this small flower
And where care lodges sleep will never lie;
Thou art uprous'd with some distemp'rature;
We met, we woo'd, and made exchange of vow,
I'll tell thee as we pass; but this I pray,
Hath wash'd thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!
remain, after the wearing, solely singular.
And there she shall at Friar Laurence' cell
Had she affections and warm youthful blood,
O God, she comes! O honey nurse, what news?
Say either, and I'll stay the circumstance.
What says he of our marriage? What of that?
It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
They'll be in scarlet straight at any news.
And if we meet, we shall not scape a brawl,
Tyb. Romeo, the love I bear thee can afford
But love thee better than thou canst devise
Till thou shalt know the reason of my love;
Gentlemen, for shame! forbear this outrage!
Tybalt, Mercutio, the Prince expressly hath
Rom. Courage, man. The hurt cannot be much.
With Tybalt's slander- Tybalt, that an hour
Ben. O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio's dead!
Romeo, that spoke him fair, bid him bethink
Could not take truce with the unruly spleen
And to't they go like lightning; for, ere I
Cap. Wife. He is a kinsman to the Montague;
That you shall all repent the loss of mine.
Jul. Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,
Play'd for a pair of stainless maidenhoods.
And he will make the face of heaven so fine
But not possess'd it; and though I am sold,
But Romeo's name speaks heavenly eloquence.
Hath Romeo slain himself? Say thou but 'I,'
Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaub'd in blood,
All in gore-blood. I swounded at the sight.
When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend
All this is comfort; wherefore weep I then?
Like damned guilty deeds to sinners' minds!
Nurse. Hie to your chamber. I'll find Romeo
And bid him come to take his last farewell.
Friar. Hence from Verona art thou banished.
Friar. O deadly sin! O rude unthankfulness!
Taking thy part, hath rush'd aside the law,
More honourable state, more courtship lives
In carrion flies than Romeo. They may seize
Nurse. O holy friar, O, tell me, holy friar
Stand up, stand up! Stand, an you be a man.
Now I have stain'd the childhood of our joy
With blood remov'd but little from her own?
Did murther her; as that name's cursed hand
What, rouse thee, man! Thy Juliet is alive,
Thou pout'st upon thy fortune and thy love.
With twenty hundred thousand times more joy
It were a grief so brief to part with thee.
Nightly she sings on yond pomegranate tree.
Do lace the severing clouds in yonder East.
I'll say yon grey is not the morning's eye,
'Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia's brow;
O, now I would they had chang'd voices too,
If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him
For then I hope thou wilt not keep him long
Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors
That thou expects not nor I look'd not for.
Ere he that should be husband comes to woo.
I would the fool were married to her grave!
So worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom?
Waking or sleeping, still my care hath been
An you be mine, I'll give you to my friend;
Jul. Is there no pity sitting in the clouds
My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven.
Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye
I think you are happy in this second match,
For it excels your first; or if it did not,
And therefore have I little talk'd of love;
Jul. I will confess to you that I love him.
On Thursday next be married to this County.
And with this knife I'll help it presently.
Turn to another, this shall slay them both.
'Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife
And, if thou dar'st, I'll give thee remedy.
To live an unstain'd wife to my sweet love.
The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
In the mean time, against thou shalt awake,
We shall be much unfurnish'd for this time.
Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.
Mother. We shall be short in our provision.
To move the heavens to smile upon my state,
Come to redeem me? There's a fearful point!
And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?
Where for this many hundred years the bones
That living mortals, hearing them, run mad-
And madly play with my forefathers' joints,
I needs must wake her. Madam, madam, madam!
Mother. O me, O me! My child, my only life!
O love! O life! not life, but love in death
Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?
O, in this love, you love your child so ill
And all things change them to the contrary.
The heavens do low'r upon you for some ill;
My dreams presage some joyful news at hand.
My bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne,
When but love's shadows are so rich in joy!
Rom. Is it e'en so? Then I defy you, stars!
And hire posthorses. I will hence to-night.
In tatt'red weeds, with overwhelming brows,
Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves
Need and oppression starveth in thine eyes,
The world affords no law to make thee rich;
Apoth. My poverty but not my will consents.
Doing more murther in this loathsome world,
I sell thee poison; thou hast sold me none.
John. Going to find a barefoot brother out,
And finding him, the searchers of the town,
But thou shalt hear it. Whistle then to me,
To cross my obsequies and true love's rite?
Par. This is that banish'd haughty Montague
And here is come to do some villanous shame
One writ with me in sour misfortune's book!
Thou art not conquer'd. Beauty's ensign yet
Jul. O comfortable friar! where is my lord?
Hath thwarted our intents. Come, come away.
Chief Watch. [within] Lead, boy. Which way?
Raise up the Montagues; some others search.
As he was coming from this churchyard side.
Wife. The people in the street cry 'Romeo,'
Friar. I am the greatest, able to do least,
And here I stand, both to impeach and purge
Was Tybalt's doomsday, whose untimely death
For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pin'd.
And with wild looks bid me devise some mean
Or in my cell there would she kill herself.
The form of death. Meantime I writ to Romeo
And bear this work of heaven with patience;
And here he writes that he did buy a poison
This is my daughter's jointure, for no more
The which if you with patient ears attend,
the wall of any man or maid of Montague's.
Cap. My sword, I say! Old Montague is come
Profaners of this neighbour-stained steel-
To know our farther pleasure in this case,
The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepar'd;
Which, as he breath'd defiance to my ears,
He swung about his head and cut the winds,
Ben. Have you importun'd him by any means?
Mon. Both by myself and many other friend;
Rom. Out of her favour where I am in love.
Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!
Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is
Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,
She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow
To call hers (exquisite) in question more.
Par. Of honourable reckoning are you both,
But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?
Let two more summers wither in their pride
This night I hold an old accustom'd feast,
At my poor house look to behold this night
One pain is lessoned by another's anguish;
Herself pois'd with herself in either eye;
That shall she, marry; I remember it well.
Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,
And then my husband (God be with his soul!
A bump as big as a young cock'rel's stone;
How stands your disposition to be married?
Nurse. A man, young lady! lady, such a man
Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face,
And what obscur'd in this fair volume lies
We'll measure them a measure, and be gone.
Mer. You are a lover. Borrow Cupid's wings
The game was ne'er so fair, and I am done.
She is the fairies' midwife, and she comes
Time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers.
And then dreams he of smelling out a suit;
Which once untangled much misfortune bodes
But he that hath the steerage of my course
He shift a trencher! he scrape a trencher!
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
Therefore be patient, take no note of him.
I will withdraw; but this intrusion shall,
Rom. If I profane with my unworthiest hand
This holy shrine, the gentle fine is this:
Rom. Ay, so I fear; the more is my unrest.
I thank you, honest gentlemen. Good night.
Till she had laid it and conjur'd it down.
Is fair and honest: in his mistress' name,
Romeo, good night. I'll to my truckle-bed;
See how she leans her cheek upon her hand!
O, speak again, bright angel! for thou art
What's Montague? it is nor hand, nor foot,
Belonging to a man. O, be some other name!
My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself,
Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.
Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
My true-love passion. Therefore pardon me,
Rom. Lady, by yonder blessed moon I swear,
It is too rash, too unadvis'd, too sudden;
Rom. O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?
Anon, good nurse! Sweet Montague, be true.
Bondage is hoarse and may not speak aloud;
Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,
His help to crave and my dear hap to tell.
And flecked darkness like a drunkard reels
Poison hath residence, and medicine power;
Rom. With Rosaline, my ghostly father? No.
By holy marriage. When, and where, and how
Is Rosaline, that thou didst love so dear,
To season love, that of it doth not taste!
Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit
Of an old tear that is not wash'd off yet.
Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline.
Mer. Where the devil should this Romeo be?
Torments him so that he will sure run mad.
Within this hour my man shall be with thee
She would be as swift in motion as a ball;
My words would bandy her to my sweet love,
Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.
Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily;
'Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
I am the drudge, and toil in your delight;
That after-hours with sorrow chide us not!
Rom. Amen, amen! But come what sorrow can,
Then love-devouring death do what he dare-
Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint.
Rom. Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
Tyb. Mercutio, thou consortest with Romeo.
Rom. Alive in triumph, and Mercutio slain?
Now, Tybalt, take the 'villain' back again
How nice the quarrel was, and urg'd withal
Of Tybalt deaf to peace, but that he tilts
An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life
Bear hence this body, and attend our will.
Leap to these arms untalk'd of and unseen.
Nurse. Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished;
Just opposite to what thou justly seem'st-
No faith, no honesty in men; all perjur'd,
All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.
For such a wish! He was not born to shame.
That 'banished,' that one word 'banished,'
Which modern lamentation might have mov'd?
There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,
Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night.
What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand
I bring thee tidings of the Prince's doom.
Hence banished is banish'd from the world,
This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.
And steal immortal blessing from her lips,
O friar, the damned use that word in hell;
To comfort thee, though thou art banished.
Nurse. O, he is even in my mistress' case,
And Tybalt calls; and then on Romeo cries,
I thought thy disposition better temper'd.
Like powder in a skilless soldier's flask,
Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her.
To hear good counsel. O, what learning is!
Sojourn in Mantua. I'll find out your man,
Will you be ready? Do you like this haste?
The vaulty heaven so high above our heads.
Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu!
The County Paris, at Saint Peter's Church,
He shall not make me there a joyful bride!
I pray you tell my lord and father, madam,
And see how he will take it at your hands.
Thou counterfeit'st a bark, a sea, a wind:
Hear me with patience but to speak a word.
You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.
A whining mammet, in her fortune's tender,
But, an you will not wed, I'll pardon you.
Nor what is mine shall never do thee good.
How shall that faith return again to earth
Unless that husband send it me from heaven
Jul. If I do so, it will be of more price,
Jul. It may be so, for it is not mine own.
Par. God shield I should disturb devotion!
Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye.
It strains me past the compass of my wits.
If what thou speak'st speak not of remedy.
And hide me with a dead man in his shroud-
Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.
Will watch thy waking, and that very night
To beg your pardon. Pardon, I beseech you!
As are behooffull for our state to-morrow.
For I am sure you have your hands full all
Shall I be married then to-morrow morning?
At some hours in the night spirits resort-
Upon a rapier's point. Stay, Tybalt, stay!
Nurse! Wife! What, ho! What, nurse, I say!
Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.
But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.
That you run mad, seeing that she is well.
On this fair corse, and, as the custom is,
For though fond nature bids us all lament,
Yet nature's tears are reason's merriment.
Ah me! how sweet is love itself possess'd,
Since you did leave it for my office, sir.
Man. I do beseech you, sir, have patience.
Your looks are pale and wild and do import
Hast thou no letters to me from the friar?
To enter in the thoughts of desperate men!
Culling of simples. Meagre were his looks,
Where the infectious pestilence did reign,
So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread
Which with sweet water nightly I will dew;
What cursed foot wanders this way to-night
See thou deliver it to my lord and father.
By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint
By heaven, I love thee better than myself,
Stay not, be gone. Live, and hereafter say
For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes
How oft when men are at the point of death
Call this a lightning? O my love! my wife!
To grubs and eyeless skulls? As I discern,
What mean these masterless and gory swords
Romeo! O, pale! Who else? What, Paris too?
Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end.
Pitiful sight! here lies the County slain;
And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead,
And it missheathed in my daughter's bosom!
But, as it seems, did violence on herself.
To this same place, to this same monument.
Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb;
See what a scourge is laid upon your hate,
Cap. O brother Montague, give me thy hand.
The sun for sorrow will not show his head.
Some shall be pardon'd, and some punished;
Greg. No, for then we should be colliers.
Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?
Towards him I made; but he was ware of me
Shuts up his windows, locks fair daylight
Unless good counsel may the cause remove.
Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.
Why then, O brawling love! O loving hate!
What is it else? A madness most discreet,
This is not Romeo, he's some other where.
Ah, word ill urg'd to one that is so ill!
Nor bide th' encounter of assailing eyes,
But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart;
Lies my consent and fair according voice.
County Anselmo and his beauteous sisters;
Rom. When the devout religion of mine eye
Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars!
She could have run and waddled all about;
Wilt thou not, Jule?' and, by my holidam,
Jul. It is an honour that I dream not of.
The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.
For fair without the fair within to hide.
So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.
Her traces, of the smallest spider's web;
Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,
Of healths five fadom deep; and then anon
Which is as thin of substance as the air,
So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows
To be a virtuous and well-govern'd youth.
It is my will; the which if thou respect,
What, goodman boy? I say he shall. Go to!
And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous.
O dear account! my life is my foe's debt.
Is it e'en so? Why then, I thank you all.
Nurse. His name is Romeo, and a Montague,
And young affection gapes to be his heir;
But to his foe suppos'd he must complain,
Temp'ring extremities with extreme sweet.
When King Cophetua lov'd the beggar maid!
I conjure thee by Rosaline's bright eyes.
By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,
And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,
To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle
I am too bold; 'tis not to me she speaks.
Having some business, do entreat her eyes
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo call'd,
Retain that dear perfection which he owes
Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name;
Or if thou thinkest I am too quickly won,
My love as deep; the more I give to thee,
By one that I'll procure to come to thee,
Hence will I to my ghostly father's cell,
And from her womb children of divers kind
None but for some, and yet all different.
O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies
How much salt water thrown away in waste,
But come, young waverer, come go with me.
Hath sent a letter to his father's house.
Mer. Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.
Driving back shadows over low'ring hills.
Is three long hours; yet she is not come.
Nurse. I am aweary, give me leave awhile.
To say to me that thou art out of breath?
Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
Is this the poultice for my aching bones?
There stays a husband to make you a wife.
To fetch a ladder, by the which your love
It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
Receive in either by this dear encounter.
Or else depart. Here all eyes gaze on us.
My very friend, hath got this mortal hurt
Tybalt, that murtherer, which way ran he?
There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,
For blood of ours shed blood of Montague.
Cold death aside and with the other sends
Prince. Romeo slew him; he slew Mercutio.
But I'll amerce you with so strong a fine
And learn me how to lose a winning match,
For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night
Whiter than new snow upon a raven's back.
Give me my Romeo; and, when he shall die,
Take him and cut him out in little stars,
To an impatient child that hath new robes
And that bare vowel 'I' shall poison more
Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice.
If he be slain, say 'I'; or if not, 'no.'
Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.
That ever I should live to see thee dead!
Is Romeo slaught'red, and is Tybalt dead?
My dear-lov'd cousin, and my dearer lord?
For who is living, if those two are gone?
Was ever book containing such vile matter
That murd'red me. I would forget it fain;
Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,
All slain, all dead. 'Romeo is banished'-
And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!
I'll to him; he is hid at Laurence' cell.
Thou cut'st my head off with a golden axe
Where Juliet lives; and every cat and dog
On the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand
Displant a town, reverse a prince's doom,
Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,
Run to my study.- By-and-by!- God's will,
And slay thy lady that in thy life lives,
Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,
Go before, nurse. Commend me to thy lady,
My lord, I'll tell my lady you will come.
To-night she's mew'd up to her heaviness.
We'll keep no great ado- a friend or two;
For hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,
It may be thought we held him carelessly,
It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.
Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.
I must be gone and live, or stay and die.
I have more care to stay than will to go.
It is the lark that sings so out of tune,
O, by this count I shall be much in years
For sweet discourses in our time to come.
I cannot choose but ever weep the friend.
To hear him nam'd and cannot come to him,
To wreak the love I bore my cousin Tybalt
Rather than Paris. These are news indeed!
And yet 'not proud'? Mistress minion you,
To go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church,
That God had lent us but this only child;
By leaving earth? Comfort me, counsel me.
Or if he do, it needs must be by stealth.
Enter Friar, [Laurence] and County Paris.
And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
That she do give her sorrow so much sway,
Now do you know the reason of this haste.
Par. Do not deny to him that you love me.
For it was bad enough before their spite.
Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it.
If in thy wisdom thou canst give no help,
Give me some present counsel; or, behold,
Which the commission of thy years and art
From off the battlements of yonder tower,
To-morrow night look that thou lie alone;
And this distilled liquor drink thou off;
Each part, depriv'd of supple government,
Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift;
Now, afore God, this reverend holy friar,
As you think fit to furnish me to-morrow?
Subtilly hath minist'red to have me dead,
Shall I not then be stifled in the vault,
O, look! methinks I see my cousin's ghost
Seeking out Romeo, that did spit his body
Why, lamb! why, lady! Fie, you slug-abed!
Marry, and amen. How sound is she asleep!
Revive, look up, or I will die with thee!
Death is my son-in-law, Death is my heir;
And doth it give me such a sight as this?
Dry up your tears and stick your rosemary
In all her best array bear her to church;
Cap. All things that we ordained festival
Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change;
To follow this fair corse unto her grave.
'When griping grief the heart doth wound,
I saw her laid low in her kindred's vault
O, pardon me for bringing these ill news,
Were thinly scattered, to make up a show.
A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear
That the life-weary taker mall fall dead,
Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back:
John. Holy Franciscan friar, brother, ho!
Laur. Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?
Laur. Unhappy fortune! By my brotherhood,
May do much danger. Friar John, go hence,
Get me an iron crow and bring it straight
To the dead bodies. I will apprehend him.
Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,
Why art thou yet so fair? Shall I believe
The dashing rocks thy seasick weary bark!
Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep.
Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead;
And Paris too. Come, I'll dispose of thee
Go, some of you; whoe'er you find attach.
Go, tell the Prince; run to the Capulets;
Prince. What misadventure is so early up,
Enter Capulet and his Wife [with others].
Yet most suspected, as the time and place
But when I came, some minute ere the time
She wakes; and I entreated her come forth
Be sacrific'd, some hour before his time,
Where be these enemies? Capulet, Montage,
For I will raise her Statue in pure gold,
That whiles Verona by that name is known,
There shall no figure at such rate be set
From ancient grudge break to new mutiny,
Turn thee Benvolio! look upon thy death.
As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee.
And flourishes his blade in spite of me.
Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word
To wield old partisans, in hands as old,
I drew to part them. In the instant came
Right glad I am he was not at this fray.
A troubled mind drave me to walk abroad;
Should in the furthest East bean to draw
Away from light steals home my heavy son
And private in his chamber pens himself,
We would as willingly give cure as know.
With Cupid's arrow. She hath Dian's wit,
Do I live dead that live to tell it now.
Show me a mistress that is passing fair,
What doth her beauty serve but as a note
Cap. But Montague is bound as well as I,
And pity 'tis you liv'd at odds so long.
My child is yet a stranger in the world,
Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.
An she agree, within her scope of choice
Such as I love; and you among the store,
Take thou some new infection to thy eye,
And the rank poison of the old will die.
Shut up in Prison, kept without my food,
Signior Placentio and His lovely nieces;
With all the admired beauties of Verona.
Your lady's love against some other maid
Were of an age. Well, Susan is with God;
She was too good for me. But, as I said,
A perilous knock; and it cried bitterly.
As all the world- why he's a man of wax.
Find written in the margent of his eyes,
With nimble soles; I have a soul of lead
And soar with them above a common bound.
Too great oppression for a tender thing.
What curious eye doth quote deformities?
The cover, of the wings of grasshoppers;
Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
Which are the children of an idle brain,
Of a despised life, clos'd in my breast,
Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet,
For you and I are past our dancing days.
Come hither, cover'd with an antic face,
Tyb. Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe;
You must contrary me! Marry, 'tis time.-
Jul. Go ask his name.- If he be married,
Being held a foe, he may not have access
A lane by the wall of Capulet's orchard.
Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied!
The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.
To be consorted with the humorous night.
O, Romeo, that she were, O that she were
Her vestal livery is but sick and green,
Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him
When he bestrides the lazy-pacing clouds
Jul. 'Tis but thy name that is my enemy.
Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.
Had I it written, I would tear the word.
He lent me counsel, and I lent him eyes.
Which the dark night hath so discovered.
That monthly changes in her circled orb,
I have no joy of this contract to-night.
And yet I wish but for the thing I have.
Being in night, all this is but a dream,
And all my fortunes at thy foot I'll lay
And yet no farther than a wanton's bird,
That lets it hop a little from her hand,
Non, ere the sun advance his burning eye
And vice sometime's by action dignified.
Two such opposed kings encamp them still
Our Romeo hath not been in bed to-night.
As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine,
Ben. Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet,
Ben. Here comes Romeo! here comes Romeo!
Rom. Why, then is my pump well-flower'd.
Nurse. Out upon you! What a man are you!
Ben. She will endite him to some supper.
something stale and hoar ere it be spent
was this that was so full of his ropery?
In half an hour she 'promis'd to return.
By playing it to me with so sour a face.
Is thy news good or bad? Answer to that.
Go; I'll to dinner; hie you to the cell.
And in the taste confounds the appetite.
Brags of his substance, not of ornament.
But my true love is grown to such excess
Till Holy Church incorporate two in one.
Ben. By my head, here come the Capulets.
And so good Capulet, which name I tender
Rom. Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.
A plague o' both your houses! I am sped.
And in my temper soft'ned valour's steel
This but begins the woe others must end.
If thou art taken. Hence, be gone, away!
I charge thee in the Prince's name obey.
Your high displeasure. All this- uttered
Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled;
And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly.
Towards Phoebus' lodging! Such a wagoner
Lovers can see to do their amorous rites
A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse;
And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier!
Thy father, or thy mother, nay, or both,
Where is my father and my mother, nurse?
Not body's death, but body's banishment.
Live here in heaven and may look on her;
A sin-absolver, and my friend profess'd,
Rom. Yet 'banished'? Hang up philosophy!
My conceal'd lady to our cancell'd love?
A pack of blessings light upon thy back;
Happiness courts thee in her best array;
Go get thee to thy love, as was decreed,
And bid her hasten all the house to bed,
Every good hap to you that chances here.
And so did I. Well, we were born to die.
Thursday let it be- a Thursday, tell her
She shall be married to this noble earl.
Jul. O God, I have an ill-divining soul!
Methinks I see thee, now thou art below,
Lady. [within] Ho, daughter! are you up?
Is she not down so late, or up so early?
God pardon him! I do, with all my heart;
Shall give him such an unaccustom'd dram
Is my poor heart so for a kinsman vex'd.
That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,
Upon his body that hath slaughter'd him!
One who, to put thee from thy heaviness,
The gallant, young, and noble gentleman,
It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,
Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought
Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
Utter your gravity o'er a gossip's bowl,
And then to have a wretched puling fool,
Delay this marriage for a month, a week;
Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,
Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous
Which, too much minded by herself alone,
And what I spake, I spake it to my face.
My lord, we must entreat the time alone.
Or my true heart with treacherous revolt
Or walk in thievish ways, or bid me lurk
Thou shalt continue two-and-forty hours,
And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.
To you and your behests, and am enjoin'd
Not stepping o'er the bounds of modesty.
All our whole city is much bound to him.
I pray thee leave me to myself to-night;
So please you, let me now be left alone,
That almost freezes up the heat of life.
I'll call them back again to comfort me.
What if this mixture do not work at all?
For he hath still been tried a holy man.
The horrible conceit of death and night,
O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,
Ay, let the County take you in your bed!
I must needs wake you. Lady! lady! lady!
Death lies on her like an untimely frost
Nurse. O woe? O woful, woful, woful day!
Most detestable Death, by thee beguil'd,
In these confusions. Heaven and yourself
Turn from their office to black funeral-
Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast;
And her immortal part with angels lives.
Leave me and do the thing I bid thee do.
And this same needy man must sell it me.
As I remember, this should be the house.
Hold, there is forty ducats. Let me have
Doth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb.
Rom. I pay thy poverty and not thy will.
Come, cordial and not poison, go with me
Laur. Now, must I to the monument alone.
And keep her at my cell till Romeo come-
Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.
But if thou, jealous, dost return to pry
The time and my intents are savage-wild,
Stop thy unhallowed toil, vile Montague!
Obey, and go with me; for thou must die.
Par. O, I am slain! If thou be merciful,
To think it was so? O, give me thy hand,
And that the lean abhorred monster keeps
And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on
My master knows not but I am gone hence,
O, much I fear some ill unthrifty thing.
Who here hath lain this two days buried.
And Romeo dead; and Juliet, dead before,
To see thy son and heir more early down.
But he which bore my letter, Friar John,
Till I conveniently could send to Romeo.
Her nurse is privy; and if aught in this
And I, for winking at you, discords too,
In fair Verona, where we lay our scene,
Abr. Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
Abr. Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
Or manage it to part these men with me.
Cast by their grave beseeming ornaments
For this time all the rest depart away.
And, Montague, come you this afternoon,
Where, underneath the grove of sycamore
But all so soon as the all-cheering sun
But he, his own affections' counsellor,
Is to himself- I will not say how true-
Rom. Why, such is love's transgression.
A choking gall, and a preserving sweet.
An if you leave me so, you do me wrong.
Rom. What, shall I groan and tell thee?
Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold.
Ben. By giving liberty unto thine eyes.
He that is strucken blind cannot forget
For men so old as we to keep the peace.
Such comfort as do lusty young men feel
Inherit at my house. Hear all, all see,
Rom. Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.
Signior Valentio and His cousin Tybalt;
She is not fourteen. How long is it now
For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,
Nay, I do bear a brain. But, as I said,
And since that time it is eleven years,
To see now how a jest shall come about!
And yet, I warrant, it bad upon it brow
I was your mother much upon these years
But no more deep will I endart mine eye
Ben. The date is out of such prolixity.
Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath,
Being but heavy, I will bear the light.
Athwart men's noses as they lie asleep;
Prick'd from the lazy finger of a maid;
And sleeps again. This is that very Mab
By some vile forfeit of untimely death.
Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day
That I have worn a visor and could tell
A whispering tale in a fair lady's ear,
Now, by the stock and honour of my kin,
To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.
A villain, that is hither come in spite
An ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.
And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.
I tell you, he that can lay hold of her
Nurse. The son and heir of old Tiberio.
Romeo! humours! madman! passion! lover!
Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,
That in thy likeness thou appear to us!
An open et cetera, thou a pop'rin pear!
Who is already sick and pale with grief
By any other name would smell as sweet.
Therefore thy kinsmen are no let to me.
My life were better ended by their hate
I would adventure for such merchandise.
In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond,
The more I have, for both are infinite.
Too flattering-sweet to be substantial.
If that thy bent of love be honourable,
I have forgot why I did call thee back.
What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?
Young son, it argues a distempered head
Or if not so, then here I hit it right-
That's by me wounded. Both our remedies
I bear no hatred, blessed man, for, lo,
My intercession likewise steads my foe.
case as mine a man may strain courtesy.
Mer. God ye good-den, fair gentlewoman.
Two may keep counsel, putting one away?
Unwieldy, slow, heavy and pale as lead.
Do you not see that I am out of breath?
Beshrew your heart for sending me about
Henceforward do your messages yourself.
Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.
Here comes the lady. O, so light a foot
Jul. Good even to my ghostly confessor.
Unfold the imagin'd happiness that both
Either withdraw unto some private place
I will not budge for no man's pleasure,
Rom. I do protest I never injur'd thee,
Forbid this bandying in Verona streets.
Mer. Help me into some house, Benvolio,
Ben. O noble Prince. I can discover all
The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl.
This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.
Romeo slew Tybalt; Romeo must not live.
I will be deaf to pleading and excuses;
Thou sober-suited matron, all in black,
O, I have bought the mansion of a love,
Not yet enjoy'd. So tedious is this day
To prison, eyes; ne'er look on liberty!
O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell
In mortal paradise of such sweet flesh?
'Romeo is banished'- to speak that word
To comfort you. I wot well where he is.
For exile hath more terror in his look,
And little mouse, every unworthy thing,
To mangle me with that word 'banished'?
Where is my lady's lord, where's Romeo?
Doth not she think me an old murtherer,
Or ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
Which, like a usurer, abound'st in all,
Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury,
But, like a misbhav'd and sullen wench,
For then thou canst not pass to Mantua,
Than thou went'st forth in lamentation.
Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto.
Either be gone before the watch be set,
Enter Old Capulet, his Wife, and Paris.
Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love
Some say the lark makes sweet division;
That he shall soon keep Tybalt company;
And then I hope thou wilt be satisfied.
What are they, I beseech your ladyship?
I wonder at this haste, that I must wed
Thy tempest-tossed body. How now, wife?
Speak not, reply not, do not answer me!
But now I see this one is one too much,
And that we have a curse in having her.
To answer 'I'll not wed, I cannot love;
In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.
Jul. Speak'st thou this from thy heart?
So many thousand times? Go, counsellor!
Par. My father Capulet will have it so,
Shall play the empire, arbitrating that
Could to no issue of true honour bring.
And I will do it without fear or doubt,
To marry Paris. Wednesday is to-morrow.
Take thou this vial, being then in bed,
In thy best robes uncovered on the bier
To Mantua, with my letters to thy lord.
By holy Laurence to fall prostrate here
And gave him what becomed love I might,
Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her.
I'll not to bed to-night; let me alone.
My dismal scene I needs must act alone.
Environed with all these hideous fears,
Romeo, I come! this do I drink to thee.
Look to the bak'd meats, good Angelica;
And never trouble Peter for the matter.
Alas, alas! Help, help! My lady's dead!
O son, the night before thy wedding day
But one thing to rejoice and solace in,
Uncomfortable time, why cam'st thou now
And weep ye now, seeing she is advanc'd
Pet. Pretty! What say You, Hugh Rebeck?
And all this day an unaccustom'd spirit
I dreamt my lady came and found me dead
And presently took post to tell it you.
Sharp misery had worn him to the bones;
Suspecting that we both were in a house
Under yond yew tree lay thee all along,
The obsequies that I for thee will keep
A precious ring- a ring that I must use
Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,
Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee.
For I come hither arm'd against myself.
Mercutio's kinsman, noble County Paris!
Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet
And never from this palace of dim night
A dateless bargain to engrossing death!
To help me after? I will kiss thy lips.
Haply some poison yet doth hang on them
And then will I be general of your woes
And let mischance be slave to patience.
A sleeping potion; which so took effect
Was stay'd by accident, and yesternight
Return'd my letter back. Then all alone
Miscarried by my fault, let my old life
Whose misadventur'd piteous overthrows
If ever you disturb our streets again,
And stole into the covert of the wood.
I- measuring his affections by my own,
And makes himself an artificial night.
But to himself so secret and so close,
As is the bud bit with an envious worm
Misshapen chaos of well-seeming forms!
In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.
For beauty, starv'd with her severity,
When well apparell'd April on the heel
Serv. Ye say honestly. Rest you merry!
'A was a merry man) took up the child.
Are made already mothers. By my count,
And see how one another lends content;
By having him making yourself no less.
I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe.
In shape no bigger than an agate stone
Her wagoner, a small grey-coated gnat,
Not half so big as a round little worm
Even now the frozen bosom of the North
Ah ha, my mistresses! which of you all
As yonder lady o'er her fellows shows.
And, to say truth, Verona brags of him
Here in my house do him disparagement.
Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
My grave is like to be my wedding bed.
Now Romeo is belov'd, and loves again,
Alike bewitched by the charm of looks;
Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh;
Young Adam Cupid, he that shot so trim
It is the East, and Juliet is the sun!
Be not her maid, since she is envious.
Unto the white-upturned wond'ring eyes
For stony limits cannot hold love out,
And yet I would it were to give again.
To lure this tassel-gentle back again!
I must up-fill this osier cage of ours
So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed.
Therefore thy earliness doth me assure
Mer. Farewell, ancient lady. Farewell,
Which to the high topgallant of my joy
Must be my convoy in the secret night.
Let me be satisfied, is't good or bad?
Are you so hot? Marry come up, I trow.
Hie you to church; I must another way,
Doth much excuse the appertaining rage
To such a greeting. Villain am I none.
Tybalt, you ratcatcher, will you walk?
Staying for thine to keep him company.
The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.
That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.
Who had but newly entertain'd revenge,
And bring in cloudy night immediately.
Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!
Romeo that kill'd him, he is banished.
A damned saint, an honourable villain!
Upon his brow shame is asham'd to sit;
O, what a beast was I to chide at him!
Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy.
'Tybalt is dead, and Romeo- banished.'
Was woe enough, if it had ended there;
Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship
Affliction is enanmour'd of thy parts,
Is my dear son with such sour company.
But 'banished' to kill me- 'banished'?
And fall upon the ground, as I do now,
Taking the measure of an unmade grave.
Why should you fall into so deep an O?
Thou hast amaz'd me. By my holy order,
And usest none in that true use indeed
Misshapen in the conduct of them both,
And he shall signify from time to time
Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed;
It is some meteor that the sun exhales
To be to thee this night a torchbearer
I am content, so thou wilt have it so.
This doth not so, for she divideth us.
The day is broke; be wary, look about.
Jul. Indeed I never shall be satisfied
Madam, if you could find out but a man
But for the sunset of my brother's son
Evermore show'ring? In one little body
I am too young, I pray you pardon me'!
That sees into the bottom of my grief?
To make confession and to be absolv'd.
Par. Happily met, my lady and my wife!
Or shall I come to you at evening mass
Be not so long to speak. I long to die
Which craves as desperate an execution
Or shut me nightly in a charnel house,
A cold and drowsy humour; for no pulse
Then, as the manner of our country is,
And hither shall he come; and he and I
Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
If no inconstant toy nor womanish fear
To help me sort such needful ornaments
What if it be a poison which the friar
Because he married me before to Romeo?
I will not entertain so bad a thought.
Together with the terror of the place-
Of all my buried ancestors are pack'd;
Some aqua-vitae, ho! My lord! my lady!
Cap. Ready to go, but never to return.
My daughter he hath wedded. I will die
Most miserable hour that e'er time saw
Never was seen so black a day as this.
And all the better is it for the maid.
The most you sought was her promotion,
3. Mus. Faith, I know not what to say.
How fares my Juliet? That I ask again,
For nothing can be ill if she be well.
And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,
Whose sale is present death in Mantua,
Hath had no notice of these accidents;
(O woe! thy canopy is dust and stones)
It is supposed the fair creature died-
What said my man when my betossed soul
Did not attend him as we rode? I think
A lightning before death. O, how may I
Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty.
Depart again. Here, here will I remain
And fearfully did menace me with death
I dreamt my master and another fought,
A greater power than we can contradict
We cannot without circumstance descry.
With open outcry, toward our monument.
With instruments upon them fit to open
To press before thy father to a grave?
Then gave I her (so tutored by my art)
Meaning to keep her closely at my cell
And then I ran away to call the watch.
Enter Prince Escalus, with his Train.
You, Capulet, shall go along with me;
The shady curtains from Aurora's bed,
My will to her consent is but a part.
Nurse. I'll lay fourteen of my teeth-
Scaring the ladies like a crowkeeper;
After the prompter, for our entrance;
Under love's heavy burthen do I sink.
But every man betake him to his legs.
Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
They march about the stage. [Exeunt.]
Come Pentecost as quickly as it will,
His son was but a ward two years ago.
Like a rich jewel in an Ethiop's ear-
To scorn at our solemnity this night.
'A bears him like a portly gentleman,
You'll make a mutiny among my guests!
You are a saucy boy. Is't so, indeed?
Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late;
Her eye discourses; I will answer it.
O that I were a glove upon that hand,
Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part
I know not how to tell thee who I am.
They say Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,
My bounty is as boundless as the sea,
Like softest music to attending ears!
We sucking on her natural bosom find;
I have been feasting with mine enemy,
Where on a sudden one hath wounded me
Within thy help and holy physic lies.
On the fair daughter of rich Capulet;
That thou consent to marry us to-day.
In one respect I'll thy assistant be;
Nurse. God ye good morrow, gentlemen.
Farewell. Commend me to thy mistress.
Rom. What say'st thou, my dear nurse?
Now is the sun upon the highmost hill
It is enough I may but call her mine.
Is loathsome in his own deliciousness
And yet not fall; so light is vanity.
Mer. And but one word with one of us?
And reason coldly of your grievances,
Hath been my kinsman. O sweet Juliet,
And fire-ey'd fury be my conduct now!
As Phaeton would whip you to the West
That runaway eyes may wink, and Romeo
Think true love acted simple modesty.
And pay no worship to the garish sun.
Though heaven cannot. O Romeo, Romeo!
Who, even in pure and vestal modesty,
They are free men, but I am banished.
An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,
Doting like me, and like me banished,
Have you delivered to her our decree?
Or if you do not, make the bridal bed
As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,
As living here and you no use of him.
I'll to the friar to know his remedy.
And in his wisdom hastes our marriage
Are you at leisure, holy father, now,
If, rather than to marry County Paris
Then is it likely thou wilt undertake
To paly ashes, thy eyes' windows fall
A peevish self-will'd harlotry it is.
How if, when I am laid into the tomb,
The County Paris hath set up his rest
Flower as she was, deflowered by him.
By cruel cruel thee quite overthrown!
And with my child my joys are buried!
Exeunt. Manent Musicians [and Nurse].
Pet. I will then give it you soundly.
News from Verona! How now, Balthasar?
An alligator stuff'd, and other skins
Noting this penury, to myself I said,
Welcome from Mantua. What says Romeo?
Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
Of dear import; and the neglecting it
And do not interrupt me in my course.
In what I farther shall intend to do,
Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.
Said he not so? or did I dream it so?
I'll bury thee in a triumphant grave.
Forgive me, cousin.' Ah, dear Juliet,
Thee here in dark to be his paramour?
If I did stay to look on his intents.
The stony entrance of this sepulchre?
I do remember well where I should be,
That warns my old age to a sepulchre.
Bring forth the parties of suspicion.
To County Paris. Then comes she to me
To rid her from this second marriage,
If I departed not and left him there.
And bid me stand aloof, and so I did.
Samp. I strike quickly, being moved.
So early walking did I see your son.
Being one too many by my weary self-
Pursu'd my humour, not Pursuing his,
O anything, of nothing first create!
Ben. At thy good heart's oppression.
To merit bliss by making me despair.
She is the hopeful lady of my earth.
Whereto I have invited many a guest,
Go thither, and with unattainted eye
My lord and you were then at Mantua.
I'll be a candle-holder and look on;
Direct my sail! On, lusty gentlemen!
To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?
Am I the master here, or you? Go to!
Her mother is the lady of the house.
Prodigious birth of love it is to me
And sails upon the bosom of the air.
Deny thy father and refuse thy name!
If any of my kinsmen find thee here.
And I am proof against their enmity.
I am no pilot; yet, wert thou as far
And where the worser is predominant,
For this alliance may so happy prove
That idles in the wanton summer air,
cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.
The day is hot, the Capulets abroad.
As dearly as mine own, be satisfied.
Tyb. What wouldst thou have with me?
Is but a little way above our heads,
As is the night before some festival
I am not I, if there be such an 'I';
O courteous Tybalt! honest gentleman
Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?
Despised substance of divinest show!
Sole monarch of the universal earth.
Both you and I, for Romeo is exil'd.
He made you for a highway to my bed;
But purgatory, torture, hell itself.
Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,
Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,
Shot from the deadly level of a gun,
Thy noble shape is but a form of wax
Digressing from the valour of a man;
is get afire by thine own ignorance,
I promise you, but for your company,
Being our kinsman, if we revel much.
That we may call it early by-and-by.
And light thee on the way to Mantua.
For in a minute there are many days.
As one dead in the bottom of a tomb.
To bear a poison, I would temper it;
Proud can I never be of what I hate,
O sweet my mother, cast me not away!
Uneven is the course; I like it not.
To stop the inundation of her tears,
Henceforward I am ever rul'd by you.
As in a vault, an ancient receptacle
Alack, alack, is it not like that I,
Cap. A jealous hood, a jealous hood!
Go waken Juliet; go and trim her up.
In lasting labour of his pilgrimage!
Our instruments to melancholy bells,
And go, Sir Paris. Every one prepare
Enter Romeo's Man Balthasar, booted.
How doth my lady? Is my father well?
Her body sleeps in Capel's monument,
Is death to any he that utters them.
Here in this city visiting the sick,
Why I descend into this bed of death
And apprehend thee for a felon here.
O, what more favour can I do to thee
That unsubstantial Death is amorous,
Myself condemned and myself excus'd.
Is not so long as is a tedious tale.
As I intended, for it wrought on her
The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.
All this I know, and to the marriage
And then in post he came from Mantua
And by-and-by my master drew on him;
Of a poor pothecary, and therewithal
As that of true and faithful Juliet.
By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
So far from sounding and discovery,
Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
Mercutio and his brother Valentine;
To beautify him only lacks a cover.
Give me a case to put my visage in.
Drawn with a team of little atomies
Then dreams he of another benefice.
Making them women of good carriage.
Rom. Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace!
Servingmen come forth with napkins.
'Tis since the nuptial of Lucentio,
Ben. Romeo! my cousin Romeo! Romeo!
That were some spite; my invocation
I conjure only but to raise up him.
Now will he sit under a medlar tree
Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?
With repetition of my Romeo's name.
Rememb'ring how I love thy company.
Forgetting any other home but this.
To lay one in, another out to have.
bench? O, their bones, their bones!
Ben. Two, two! a shirt and a smock.
of that name, for fault of a worse.
Mer. A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! So ho!
Nurse. No, truly, sir; not a penny.
In my behalf- my reputation stain'd
We are undone, lady, we are undone!
Your tributary drops belong to woe,
Adversity's sweet milk, philosophy,
I would have been abed an hour ago.
Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed;
With Romeo till I behold him- dead-
Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy
Or never after look me in the face.
At home, abroad, alone, in company,
Do thou but call my resolution wise
Shall be the label to another deed,
Most lamentable day, most woful day
O day! O day! O day! O hateful day!
And doleful dumps the mind oppress,
Enter Friar John to Friar Laurence.
She will beshrew me much that Romeo
Is partly to behold my lady's face,
More fierce and more inexorable far
A madman's mercy bid thee run away.
To sunder his that was thine enemy?
It burneth in the Capels' monument.
Friar. How long hath he been there?
Till we can clear these ambiguities
An old Man, of the Capulet family.
disgrace to them, if they bear it.
And made Verona's ancient citizens
Or dedicate his beauty to the sun.
O heavy lightness! serious vanity!
O, she's rich in beauty; only poor
Begot of nothing but vain fantasy;
Juliet, Tybalt, and all the Guests
Exeunt [all but Juliet and Nurse].
As is a winged messenger of heaven
Mer. Thou hast most kindly hit it.
take it, is a gentlemanlike offer.
Enter Mercutio, Benvolio, and Men.
Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity
But by-and-by comes back to Romeo,
Immediately we do exile him hence.
Beautiful tyrant! fiend angelical!
But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.
But Romeo may not- he is banished.
By doing damned hate upon thyself?
Without a sudden calm will overset
Lady. Fie, fie! what, are you mad?
A gentleman of princely parentage,
Go in; and tell my lady I am gone,
Or bid me go into a new-made grave
Abate thy valour in the acting it.
To County Paris, to prepare him up
Or, if I live, is it not very like
Enter Lady of the House and Nurse.
To murther, murther our solemnity?
Then music with her silver sound'-
That I reviv'd and was an emperor.
A beggarly account of empty boxes,
'An if a man did need a poison now
As violently as hasty powder fir'd
So fearful were they of infection.
And there I am. Where is my Romeo?
Enter the Prince [and Attendants].
At the prefixed hour of her waking
Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.
Peter, servant to Juliet's nurse.
Greg. How? turn thy back and run?
My fair niece Rosaline and Livia;
Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,
On the forefinger of an alderman,
Her chariot is an empty hazelnut,
sought for, in the great chamber.
Tyb. 'Tis he, that villain Romeo.
The only son of your great enemy.
That I must love a loathed enemy.
To meet her new beloved anywhere;
Henceforth I never will be Romeo.
So loving-jealous of his liberty.
Rom. A most courteous exposition.
Lord! she will be a joyful woman.
Enter Friar [Laurence] and Romeo.
A lover may bestride the gossamer
Away to heaven respective lenity,
Retorts it. Romeo he cries aloud,
But Romeo may not. More validity,
In what vile part of this anatomy
The unreasonable fury of a beast.
Afore me, It is so very very late
Upon so soft a subject as myself!
I wake before the time that Romeo
'Then music with her silver sound
One of our order, to associate me
But I will write again to Mantua,
By urging me to fury. O, be gone!
Will I set up my everlasting rest
Is empty on the back of Montague,
Prince. Look, and thou shalt see.
Of her awaking, here untimely lay
For never was a story of more woe
Lady Montague, wife to Montague.
Take it in what sense thou wilt.
Enter Old Montague and his Wife.
Rom. Ay me! sad hours seem long.
Enter Capulet's Wife, and Nurse.
Examine every married lineament,
A visor for a visor! What care I
2. Cap. By'r Lady, thirty years.
Nurse. What's this? what's this?
It is my lady; O, it is my love!
And I'll no longer be a Capulet.
Which is the god of my idolatry,
Many for many virtues excellent,
Jesu Maria! What a deal of brine
Enter Nurse and her Man [Peter].
Rom. I thought all for the best.
And thou art wedded to calamity.
Unseemly woman in a seeming man!
Cap. How canst thou try them so?
Nurse!- What should she do here?
That ever ever I did yet behold!
But not another sin upon my head
Among a sisterhood of holy nuns.
Unto the rigour of severest law.
Tybalt, nephew to Lady Capulet.
Tybalt, nephew to Lady Capulet.
Wife. A fortnight and odd days.
Or shall we on without apology?
Rom. I dreamt a dream to-night.
and Gentlewomen to the Maskers.
Enter Juliet above at a window.
Because it is an enemy to thee.
Rom. Nay, good goose, bite not!
Nurse. Peter, stay at the gate.
[Exit. [supported by Benvolio].
Rom. This shall determine that.
Friar. Hold thy desperate hand.
Nurse. God in heaven bless her!
May be put from her by society.
For I have need of many orisons
O weraday that ever I was born!
Nurse. Look, look! O heavy day!
Par. I do defy thy, conjuration
Friar. Go with me to the vault.
Lady Capulet, wife to Capulet.
Samp. I do bite my thumb, sir.
Ben. Why, Romeo, art thou mad?
Serv. To supper, to our house.
Tyb. Why, uncle, 'tis a shame.
Jul. A rhyme I learnt even now
Ben. Go then, for 'tis in vain
That I might touch that cheek!
Jul. At what o'clock to-morrow
occupy the argument no longer.
When it hoars ere it be spent.
Mer. The fee simple? O simple!
Jul. Can heaven be so envious?
But O, it presses to my memory
Lady. That same villain Romeo.
Cap. Peace, you mumbling fool!
1. Mus. What will you give us?
Verona. Friar Laurence's cell.
Enter [Paris's] Boy and Watch.
Mon. But I can give thee more;
Poor sacrifices of our enmity!
Greg. The heads of the maids?
Greg. No, marry. I fear thee!
Lucio and the lively Helena.'
Mer. That dreamers often lie.
Enter Benvolio with Mercutio.
Rom. I take thee at thy word.
Rom. If my heart's dear love-
Rom. I would I were thy bird.
Rom. And bad'st me bury love.
Mer. A challenge, on my life.
What, have you din'd at home?
Ben. Am I like such a fellow?
Mer. Come, sir, your passado!
And soundly too. Your houses!
Citizen. Up, sir, go with me.
Friar. That's a certain text.
Cap. Tush, I will stir about,
Nurse. Go, you cot-quean, go,
Rom. Tush, thou art deceiv'd.
Rom. No matter. Get thee gone
[Exeunt others of the Watch.]
Balthasar, servant to Romeo.
Sampson, servant to Capulet.
Gregory, servant to Capulet.
Juliet, daughter to Capulet.
Greg. [aside to Sampson] No.
Ben. No, coz, I rather weep.
Mer. True, I talk of dreams;
Music plays, and they dance.
Enter Juliet again, [above].
Enter Benvolio and Mercutio.
Ben. Stop there, stop there!
Rom. Go to! I say you shall.
Rom. Commend me to thy lady.
Mer. By my heel, I care not.
Hold, Tybalt! Good Mercutio!
Is he gone and hath nothing?
Rom. O, I am fortune's fool!
Ben. There lies that Tybalt.
Prince. And for that offence
Jul. Blister'd be thy tongue
But, soft! what day is this?
Ere I again behold my Romeo!
1. Mus. Why 'Heart's ease'',
What say you, Simon Catling?
I do remember an apothecary,
And that my master slew him.
Enter Montague [and others].
Friar Laurence, Franciscan.
Abram, servant to Montague.
am a pretty piece of flesh.
Abr. Quarrel, sir? No, sir.
Exeunt [Montague and Wife].
Ben. Soft! I will go along.
Exeunt [Capulet and Paris].
Ben. For what, I pray thee?
The lady widow of Vitruvio;
Cap. Will you tell me that?
One calls within, 'Juliet.'
Mer. Nay, I'll conjure too.
So stumblest on my counsel?
Rom. What shall I swear by?
now upon the prick of noon.
He walks by them and sings.
Lady. Why, how now, Juliet?
O, he's a lovely gentleman!
Jul. What must be shall be.
In this so sudden business.
What is there? Now, fellow,
[Draws aside the curtains.]
Mother. What noise is here?
Mother. What is the matter?
[Exeunt some of the Watch.]
Escalus, Prince of Verona.
Greg. Do you quarrel, sir?
Rom. For your broken shin.
you read anything you see?
Mer. I mean, sir, in delay
Rom. Well, what was yours?
Jul. You kiss by th' book.
Came he not home to-night?
Ben. Romeo will answer it.
Rom. What hast thou found?
Is very good meat in Lent;
Exeunt Mercutio, Benvolio.
tutor me from quarrelling!
Ben. Romeo, away, be gone!
That Romeo bid thee fetch?
In such a gorgeous palace!
And then down falls again.
I will omit no opportunity
Jul. Madam, I am not well.
Nurse. I speak no treason.
Exeunt [Mother and Nurse.]
For this night's watching.
mourners, and stay dinner.
[Snatches Romeo's dagger.]
Ben. Good morrow, cousin.
Rom. Is the day so young?
Ben. But new struck nine.
Rom. Good heart, at what?
Enter Benvolio and Romeo.
Wife. She's not fourteen.
Juliet, the County stays.
Cap. He shall be endur'd.
O that she knew she were!
Jul. Do not swear at all;
Rom. By the hour of nine.
Rom. Good morrow, father.
Ben. Why, what is Tybalt?
[sings] lady, lady, lady.
Nurse. O God's Lady dear!
Ben. What, art thou hurt?
They fight. Tybalt falls.
Nurse. Ay, ay, the cords.
Friar. O woeful sympathy!
Jul. Feeling so the loss,
Jul. What villain, madam?
Nurse. May not one speak?
Nurse. Faith, here it is.
Of disobedient opposition
O woful day! O woful day!
Apoth. Who calls so loud?
Jul. How now? Who calls?
Rom. Nay, that's not so.
Thou talk'st of nothing.
2. Serv. Ay, boy, ready.
Rom. What is her mother?
Rom. Here's goodly gear!
Enter Nurse [and Peter].
"Where is your mother?"'
Enter Tybalt and others.
Ben. Why dost thou stay?
Enter Nurse, with cords.
Nurse. There's no trust,
I come from Lady Juliet.
Nurse. Even so lies she,
Enter Capulet and Nurse.
For here we need it not.
Exeunt Juliet and Nurse.
Nurse. O lamentable day!
Nurse. O lamentable day!
Romeo, son to Montague.
Friar John, Franciscan.
SCENE.--Verona; Mantua.
Verona. A public place.
Samp. Yes, better, sir.
Examine other beauties.
Cap. Young Romeo is it?
Nurse. Marry, bachelor,
Of one I danc'd withal.
Jul. By-and-by I come.-
Rom. So thrive my soul-
Jul. Sweet, so would I.
Friar. O, she knew well
man to bow in the hams.
Rom. Meaning, to cursy.
narrow to an ell broad!
But a hare that is hoar
Is too much for a score
Rom. I will follow you.
Enter Friar [Laurence].
Enter Juliet and Nurse.
Pet. You will not then?
[Lays him in the tomb.]
Bal. Full half an hour.
These dead men's tombs.
But sadly tell me who.
Jul. Madam, I am here.
But 'tis no wit to go.
Mer. Why, may one ask?
hand Of yonder knight?
Serv. I know not, sir.
Shall have the chinks.
Rom. Is she a Capulet?
And I'll believe thee.
Nurse. (within) Madam!
Nurse. (within) Madam!
To-morrow will I send.
Friar Laurence's cell.
Nurse. Is it good-den?
Friar Laurence's cell.
Friar Laurence's cell.
Lady. You are too hot.
Friar Laurence's cell.
Farewell, dear father.
Exeunt Lady and Nurse.
Help, help! Call help.
Man. No, my good lord.
[Nurse] calls within.
Shall I send to thee?
Friar. Not in a grave
The other did not so.
Rom. Pink for flower.
Nurse. My fan, Peter.
And an old hare hoar,
[with his Followers].
Shalt with him hence.
Rom. As if that name,
Par. Monday, my lord.
Cap. O, God-i-god-en!
Mother. O woful time!
Enter Friar Laurence.
Romeo opens the tomb.
Bal. I dare not, sir.
Dost thou not laugh?
Ben. Groan? Why, no;
sirrah, trudge about
Anthony, and Potpan!
I'll not endure him.
Call, good Mercutio.
there for the goose.
Mer. A sail, a sail!
Nurse. You say well.
Shame come to Romeo!
That I yet know not?
Friar. Welcome then.
Piteous predicament!
Out on her, hilding!
Some comfort, nurse.
[Exit a Servingman.]
Nurse. Ay, forsooth.
'Tis now near night.
[Exit. Paris falls.]
Warm and new kill'd.
Nurse. Your mother.
Enter Juliet above.
Rom. Bid her devise
ears ere it be out.
The life of Tybalt.
Enter Juliet alone.
[Throws them down.]
Friar. Too familiar
Rom. (rises) Nurse-
Which you weep for.
It rains downright.
lick their fingers.
Mother. Good night.
Lays down a dagger.
Spare not for cost.
and a crow of iron.
Samp. Fear me not.
Serv. My master's.
What is your will?
Mer. And so did I.
Ben. Strike, drum.
His son is thirty.
Cap. Go to, go to!
Nurse. I know not.
Nurse. Anon, anon!
Enter Romeo alone.
Come, shall we go?
Capulet's orchard.
I do beseech thee-
Friar. Benedicite!
fairly last night.
Capulet's orchard.
Capulet's orchard.
Capulet's orchard.
But send him back.
Enter Old Capulet.
Make haste, I say.
gold for sounding.
Some misadventure.
One that you love.
Thy lips are warm!
Dramatis Personae
master's kinsmen.
Farewell, my coz.
Rom. 'Tis the way
Rom. Whose house?
To bid me trudge.
Enter Servingman.
An old hare hoar,
ACT III. Scene I.
Ben. And what to?
O cousin, cousin!
Nurse. Romeo can,
Just in her case!
Juliet's chamber.
Juliet's chamber.
Mantua. A street.
Exit [Balthasar].
Enter Apothecary.
Friar. Who is it?
Three Musicians.
Nurse to Juliet.
Samp. Well, sir.
Capulet's house.
follow straight.
Capulet's house.
I'll to my rest.
ACT II. Scene I.
Mer. He is wise,
Rom. She speaks.
Take all myself.
good to hear it.
Romeo is coming.
You tallow-face!
ACT IV. Scene I.
Capulet's house.
Cap. Go, begone.
Exit Servingman.
Capulet's house.
I hear him near.
ACT I. Scene I.
Abr. No better.
Enter Benvolio.
Were in a mask?
law on my side.
is your mother?
A public place.
Mer. I am hurt.
Enter Benvolio.
Enter Citizens.
Knock [within].
Capulet's house
ACT V. Scene I.
An Apothecary.
To Lammastide?
Rom. By a name
Ben. The what?
with a letter?
And his to me,
He goeth down.
Rom. Farewell!
[Enter Nurse.]
Enter Chorus.
Abr. You lie.
Enter Tybalt.
Ben. In love?
Ben. Of love?
Rom. Whither?
Enter Juliet.
Torchbearers.
Enter Chorus.
Rom. My dear?
Nurse. Peter!
Enter Juliet.
[Exit Peter.]
Enter Juliet.
[They fight.]
Enter Tybalt.
and [others].
Nurse. Madam!
Enter Mother.
Enter Juliet.
two or three.
Enter Juliet.
Enter Mother.
Enter Mother.
Enter Father.
Unto my cell.
Friar. Romeo!
Juliet rises.
Exit [Friar].
Can I demand.
Exeunt omnes.
THE PROLOGUE
their heads.
Enter Romeo.
This is she-
Enter Romeo.
Enter Romeo.
being dared.
Enter Romeo.
Peter. Anon.
young Romeo?
Peter. Anon.
Jul. I have.
Enter Romeo.
[Exit Page.]
Enter Romeo.
Enter Nurse.
Enter Nurse.
Nurse. What?
Enter Nurse.
Enter Peter.
Enter Romeo.
Whistle Boy.
An Officer.
Attendants.
of Capulet.
thumb, sir.
They fight.
Jul. Ay me!
Jul. Romeo!
Mer. Right.
Exit Romeo.
Good night.
Jul. Nurse?
Come, vial.
1. Mus. No.
They fight.
Bal. Romeo.
Montagues.
partisans.
Scene III.
Scene III.
Scene III.
Jul. Amen!
Scene III.
Scene III.
Rom. Out-
Scene II.
A Street.
Serv. Up.
Scene IV.
A street.
Scene II.
Scene IV.
A street.
Scene VI.
[Exeunt.]
occasion.
Scene II.
Farewell.
Scene IV.
Scene II.
Scene IV.
[Exeunt.]
minstrel.
Scene II.
Scene V.
PROLOGUE
the two.
Scene V.
Scene V.
with me.
Scene V.
note me?
Chorus.
[Exit.]
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
[Exit.]
Exeunt.
a hole.
wisely.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
[Exit.]
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
THE END
Romeo!
moved.
That I
Exeunt
wall.
come?
Nell.
Exit.
thee-
Exit.
logs.
you.
Exit
God.
'a
a
