I am too young, I pray you pardon me'!
Pet. Musicians, O, musicians, 'Heart's ease,' 'Heart's ease'!
Nurse. Lord, how my head aches! What a head have I!
Cap. Mass, and well said; a merry whoreson, ha!
Dove-feather'd raven! wolvish-ravening lamb!
Rom. Sin from my lips? O trespass sweetly urg'd!
Cap. Despis'd, distressed, hated, martyr'd, kill'd!
That ever I should live to see thee dead!
Alack the day! he's gone, he's kill'd, he's dead!
Nurse. Ah, weraday! he's dead, he's dead, he's dead!
Mother. Alack the day, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead!
Ben. O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio's dead!
Alas, alas! Help, help! My lady's dead!
And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!
Nurse. O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had!
Fie, how my bones ache! What a jaunce have I had!
narrow to an ell broad!
Ay, let the County take you in your bed!
Why, lamb! why, lady! Fie, you slug-abed!
Rather than Paris. These are news indeed!
Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied!
And with my child my joys are buried!
When King Cophetua lov'd the beggar maid!
Nurse. It did, it did! alas the day, it did!
Cap. Wife. Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother's child!
O child! O child! my soul, and not my child!
That ever ever I did yet behold!
See how she leans her cheek upon her hand!
For Juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand!
Jul. Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend!
Cap. A jealous hood, a jealous hood!
I bade her come. What, lamb! what ladybird!
Nurse. Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady. Lord, Lord!
Mer. Tut! dun's the mouse, the constable's own word!
Rom. Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace!
Jul. O serpent heart, hid with a flow'ring face!
You tallow-face!
In such a gorgeous palace!
Nurse. Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace!
Jul. O, break, my heart! poor bankrout, break at once!
Why, love, I say! madam! sweetheart! Why, bride!
He shall not make me there a joyful bride!
Come, bitter conduct; come, unsavoury guide!
Revive, look up, or I will die with thee!
Greg. No, marry. I fear thee!
Mother. O me, O me! My child, my only life!
Call this a lightning? O my love! my wife!
Par. Happily met, my lady and my wife!
Out, you green-sickness carrion I out, you baggage!
In lasting labour of his pilgrimage!
Gentlemen, for shame! forbear this outrage!
Mer. The fee simple? O simple!
That you shall rest but little. God forgive me!
Speak not, reply not, do not answer me!
Jul. Ay me!
Be quiet, or- More light, more light!- For shame!
Belonging to a man. O, be some other name!
Deny thy father and refuse thy name!
hath here writ. I must to the learned. In good time!
Mother. O woful time!
Hath wash'd thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!
We are undone, lady, we are undone!
By urging me to fury. O, be gone!
Ben. Romeo, away, be gone!
Such as would please. 'Tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone!
Friar. Holy Saint Francis! What a change is here!
Ben. Stop there, stop there!
O that she knew she were!
stand by too, and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure!
Just in her case!
O anything, of nothing first create!
Why then, O brawling love! O loving hate!
Jul. My only love, sprung from my only hate!
Too early seen unknown, and known too late!
Friar. Benedicite!
To season love, that of it doth not taste!
Stop thy unhallowed toil, vile Montague!
I would the fool were married to her grave!
That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love!
It is my lady; O, it is my love!
Upon so soft a subject as myself!
Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!
Out on her, hilding!
tutor me from quarrelling!
Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring!
To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug!
Cap. Hang thee, young baggage! disobedient wretch!
Cap. What, man? 'Tis not so much, 'tis not so much!
A dateless bargain to engrossing death!
Would none but I might venge my cousin's death!
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health!
Or ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
My back o' t' other side,- ah, my back, my back!
That I might touch that cheek!
Rom. O, teach me how I should forget to think!
One writ with me in sour misfortune's book!
The dashing rocks thy seasick weary bark!
Beautiful tyrant! fiend angelical!
Mer. A sail, a sail!
Rom. Farewell!
Ah, word ill urg'd to one that is so ill!
Should without eyes see pathways to his will!
Cap. Peace, you mumbling fool!
Rom. O, I am fortune's fool!
Jul. O God, I have an ill-divining soul!
And then my husband (God be with his soul!
You'll not endure him? God shall mend my soul!
Nurse. (within) Madam!
Nurse. (within) Madam!
Nurse. Madam!
I needs must wake her. Madam, madam, madam!
Upon his body that hath slaughter'd him!
O, what a beast was I to chide at him!
Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom!
And it missheathed in my daughter's bosom!
Thy lips are warm!
You will set cock-a-hoop! you'll be the man!
Unseemly woman in a seeming man!
O, he's a lovely gentleman!
Anthony, and Potpan!
Cap. O, God-i-god-en!
To enter in the thoughts of desperate men!
Jul. Amen!
Direct my sail! On, lusty gentlemen!
To lure this tassel-gentle back again!
A damned saint, an honourable villain!
Par. Beguil'd, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!
O cousin, cousin!
Mer. O calm, dishonourable, vile submission!
Par. God shield I should disturb devotion!
Nurse. Anon, anon!
O weraday that ever I was born!
It is the East, and Juliet is the sun!
To catch my death with jauncing up and down!
Officer. Clubs, bills, and partisans! Strike! beat them down!
By cruel cruel thee quite overthrown!
Rom. O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do!
Mer. Come, sir, your passado!
Romeo!
Ben. Romeo! my cousin Romeo! Romeo!
Though heaven cannot. O Romeo, Romeo!
Jul. Romeo!
Friar. Romeo!
Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!
Shame come to Romeo!
Ben. Here comes Romeo! here comes Romeo!
Ere I again behold my Romeo!
Good Prudence. Smatter with your gossips, go!
Well said, my hearts!- You are a princox- go!
Cap. What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!
Farewell, My lord.- Light to my chamber, ho!
John. Holy Franciscan friar, brother, ho!
I'll play the housewife for this once. What, ho!
Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!
Mer. A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! So ho!
Hold, Tybalt! Good Mercutio!
What, goodman boy? I say he shall. Go to!
Am I the master here, or you? Go to!
Cap. Go to, go to!
Marry, and amen. How sound is she asleep!
Come weep with me- past hope, past cure, past help!
Nurse. Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up!
Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear!
Nurse. O God's Lady dear!
Jul. Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!
Rom. Here's goodly gear!
An open et cetera, thou a pop'rin pear!
Yea, noise? Then I'll be brief. O happy dagger!
Nurse. God in heaven bless her!
He shift a trencher! he scrape a trencher!
And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier!
Nurse. Peter!
Nurse. Ay, a thousand times. [Exit Romeo.] Peter!
Romeo! humours! madman! passion! lover!
Marry, go before to field, he'll be your follower!
So many thousand times? Go, counsellor!
Cap. O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!
Like damned guilty deeds to sinners' minds!
bench? O, their bones, their bones!
Rom. More light and light- more dark and dark our woes!
And soundly too. Your houses!
Or I shall faint. A plague o' both your houses!
Citizens. Down with the Capulets! Down with the Montagues!
To hear good counsel. O, what learning is!
Rom. How well my comfort is reviv'd by this!
Mercutio's kinsman, noble County Paris!
Misshapen chaos of well-seeming forms!
With purple fountains issuing from your veins!
Like softest music to attending ears!
Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars!
Rom. Is it e'en so? Then I defy you, stars!
Rom. O single-sold jest, solely singular for the singleness!
Friar. O deadly sin! O rude unthankfulness!
I'll make you quiet; what!- Cheerly, my hearts!
You'll make a mutiny among my guests!
That in thy likeness thou appear to us!
3. Serv. We cannot be here and there too. Cheerly, boys!
God forbid! Where's this girl? What, Juliet!
Rom. A thousand times the worse, to want thy light!
Ere one can say 'It lightens.' Sweet, good night!
Mon. Alas, my liege, my wife is dead to-night!
Rom. O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
Did my heart love till now? Forswear it, sight!
And cruel Death hath catch'd it from my sight!
Piteous predicament!
What I have spoke; but farewell compliment!
Come to redeem me? There's a fearful point!
Rom. Nay, good goose, bite not!
That after-hours with sorrow chide us not!
fiddlestick; here's that shall make you dance. Zounds, consort!
Rom. Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast!
Come to thy heart as that within my breast!
From this world-wearied flesh. Eyes, look your last!
Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest!
Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest!
To see now how a jest shall come about!
I hear some noise within. Dear love, adieu!
Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu!
Nurse. Out upon you! What a man are you!
To beg your pardon. Pardon, I beseech you!
Despised substance of divinest show!
What, not a word? You take your pennyworths now!
And fire-ey'd fury be my conduct now!
Nurse. She's dead, deceas'd; she's dead! Alack the day!
Hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the day!
Nurse. O lamentable day!
Nurse. O lamentable day!
Mother. Accurs'd, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!
O day! O day! O day! O hateful day!
Nurse. O woe? O woful, woful, woful day!
O woful day! O woful day!
Nurse. Look, look! O heavy day!
Nurse! Wife! What, ho! What, nurse, I say!
Upon a rapier's point. Stay, Tybalt, stay!
If thou art taken. Hence, be gone, away!
Jul. It is, it is! Hie hence, be gone, away!
O sweet my mother, cast me not away!
I must needs wake you. Lady! lady! lady!
Some aqua-vitae, ho! My lord! my lady!
Rom. Yet 'banished'? Hang up philosophy!
Friar. O woeful sympathy!
Rom. Wilt thou provoke me? Then have at thee, boy!
When but love's shadows are so rich in joy!
Being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut. What, ho! apothecary!
Here's to my love! [Drinks.] O true apothecary!
Serv. Ye say honestly. Rest you merry!
Poor sacrifices of our enmity!
O heavy lightness! serious vanity!
To prison, eyes; ne'er look on liberty!
"Where is your mother?"'
Hath Romeo slain himself? Say thou but 'I,'
Why followed not, when she said 'Tybalt's dead,'
That 'banished,' that one word 'banished,'
Wife. The people in the street cry 'Romeo,'
Nurse. By my troth, it is well said. 'For himself to mar,'
Is death misterm'd. Calling death 'banishment,'
Or those eyes shut that make thee answer 'I.'
Lucio and the lively Helena.'
'Tybalt is dead, and Romeo- banished.'
O, an you will have me live, play 'Heart's ease.'
Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.'
If he be slain, say 'I'; or if not, 'no.'
One calls within, 'Juliet.'
Much more than death. Do not say 'banishment.'
Wilt thou not, Jule?' It stinted, and said 'Ay.'
And, pretty fool, it stinted, and said 'Ay.'
The pretty wretch left crying, and said 'Ay.'
To think it should leave crying and say 'Ay.'
And world's exile is death. Then 'banishment'
(Strange dream that gives a dead man leave to think!)
Susan and she (God rest all Christian souls!)
(O woe! thy canopy is dust and stones)
(Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves)
Then gave I her (so tutored by my art)
1. Mus. Why 'Heart's ease'',
And she was wean'd (I never shall forget it),
And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud.,
Cap. But Montague is bound as well as I,
Alack, alack, is it not like that I,
For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,
My bounty is as boundless as the sea,
As that vast shore wash'd with the farthest sea,
Then weep no more. I'll send to one in Mantua,
Whose sale is present death in Mantua,
But I will write again to Mantua,
For then thou canst not pass to Mantua,
The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,
But then a noise did scare me from the tomb,
How if, when I am laid into the tomb,
That monthly changes in her circled orb,
Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo's seal'd,
Most detestable Death, by thee beguil'd,
Take up those cords. Poor ropes, you are beguil'd,
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo call'd,
Serv. Madam, the guests are come, supper serv'd up, you call'd,
And, in strong proof of chastity well arm'd,
Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly train'd,
No faith, no honesty in men; all perjur'd,
A sin-absolver, and my friend profess'd,
Ah me! how sweet is love itself possess'd,
Cap. Come, stir, stir, stir! The second cock hath crow'd,
Subtilly hath minist'red to have me dead,
That the life-weary taker mall fall dead,
Dead art thou, dead! alack, my child is dead,
And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead,
As glorious to this night, being o'er my head,
Take thou this vial, being then in bed,
And bid her hasten all the house to bed,
The shady curtains from Aurora's bed,
Shall be the label to another deed,
O, this same thought did but forerun my need,
Go get thee to thy love, as was decreed,
Doting like me, and like me banished,
Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied,
Jul. Go ask his name.- If he be married,
An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,
Noting this penury, to myself I said,
She was too good for me. But, as I said,
Nay, I do bear a brain. But, as I said,
But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,
The time and my intents are savage-wild,
Nurse. Now, by my maidenhead at twelve year old,
To wield old partisans, in hands as old,
With thy black mantle till strange love, grown bold,
Cap. Ha! let me see her. Out alas! she's cold,
For I will raise her Statue in pure gold,
Give me some present counsel; or, behold,
But not possess'd it; and though I am sold,
Hence banished is banish'd from the world,
My child is yet a stranger in the world,
Doing more murther in this loathsome world,
That lets it hop a little from her hand,
O that I were a glove upon that hand,
To think it was so? O, give me thy hand,
His fault concludes but what the law should end,
Friar. Bliss be upon you! Tell me, good my friend,
The which if you with patient ears attend,
By their own beauties; or, if love be blind,
In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond,
There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,
Which then most sought where most might not be found,
'When griping grief the heart doth wound,
Shut up in Prison, kept without my food,
Laur. Unhappy fortune! By my brotherhood,
Had she affections and warm youthful blood,
Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaub'd in blood,
For then she could stand high-lone; nay, by th' rood,
Rom. O blessed, blessed night! I am afeard,
And yet no farther than a wanton's bird,
Nurse. Good heart, and I faith I will tell her as much. Lord,
Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,
Ben. I do but keep the peace. Put up thy sword,
Retorts it. Romeo he cries aloud,
I do remember well where I should be,
Prince. Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,
Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face,
Come hither, cover'd with an antic face,
Par. Have I thought long to see this morning's face,
Is partly to behold my lady's face,
Jul. If I do so, it will be of more price,
is get afire by thine own ignorance,
My master knows not but I am gone hence,
May do much danger. Friar John, go hence,
And, being anger'd, puffs away from thence,
Thy fault our law calls death; but the kind Prince,
That westward rooteth from the city's side,
Ben. See, where he comes. So please you step aside,
Rom. I do protest I never injur'd thee,
For, by my soul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee,
Give me the light. Upon thy life I charge thee,
And for that name, which is no part of thee,
There art thou happy. Tybalt would kill thee,
Jul. Well, do not swear. Although I joy in thee,
By one that I'll procure to come to thee,
My love as deep; the more I give to thee,
Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
Inherit at my house. Hear all, all see,
Enter the Maskers, Enter, [with Servants,] Capulet, his Wife,
Hadst thou no poison mix'd, no sharp-ground knife,
Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,
To rid her from this second marriage,
And the continuance of their parents' rage,
A gentleman of princely parentage,
Where be these enemies? Capulet, Montage,
Who had but newly entertain'd revenge,
The letter was not nice, but full of charge,
I never should forget it. 'Wilt thou not, Jule?' quoth he,
Nurse. Even so lies she,
town, one Paris, that would fain lay knife aboard; but she,
That fair for which love groan'd for and would die,
Give me my Romeo; and, when he shall die,
And these, who, often drown'd, could never die,
Chor. Now old desire doth in his deathbed lie,
We see the ground whereon these woes do lie,
And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,
In the mean time, against thou shalt awake,
If that thy bent of love be honourable,
Prince. Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,
Wife. This is the matter- Nurse, give leave awhile,
And she, too desperate, would not go with me,
Murder'd her kinsman. O, tell me, friar, tell me,
Rom. But that a joy past joy calls out on me,
My true-love passion. Therefore pardon me,
But thou shalt hear it. Whistle then to me,
And his to me,
A thing like death to chide away this shame,
And this shall free thee from this present shame,
Is fair and honest: in his mistress' name,
Rom. As if that name,
Therefore, out of thy long-experienc'd time,
Be sacrific'd, some hour before his time,
In fair Verona, where we lay our scene,
If e'er thou wast thyself, and these woes thine,
Mer. Why, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline,
As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine,
Which, on more view of many, mine, being one,
Go in; and tell my lady I am gone,
Which, too much minded by herself alone,
So please you, let me now be left alone,
My bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne,
It is the lark that sings so out of tune,
That is renown'd for faith? Be fickle, Fortune,
Your tributary drops belong to woe,
Friar. Hold, daughter. I do spy a kind of hope,
But that thou overheard'st, ere I was ware,
Bal. As I did sleep under this yew tree here,
Tyb. Thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him here,
Vile earth, to earth resign; end motion here,
Rom. 'Tis torture, and not mercy. Heaven is here,
Jul. I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,
And Romeo dead; and Juliet, dead before,
Such as I love; and you among the store,
I will not budge for no man's pleasure,
Nurse. O, he is even in my mistress' case,
To know our farther pleasure in this case,
For I am proverb'd with a grandsire phrase,
Mer. He is wise,
But to himself so secret and so close,
Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose,
Jul. Ay, those attires are best; but, gentle nurse,
Nurse. An honour? Were not I thine only nurse,
And may not wear them. O, here comes my nurse,
Nor aught so good but, strain'd from that fair use,
Or shut me nightly in a charnel house,
Proud can I never be of what I hate,
It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,
See what a scourge is laid upon your hate,
For hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,
To move the heavens to smile upon my state,
I'll go and chat with Paris. Hie, make haste,
Therefore use none. Let Romeo hence in haste,
How much salt water thrown away in waste,
Nurse. His name is Romeo, and a Montague,
By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
Is empty on the back of Montague,
Cap. And why, my Lady Wisdom? Hold your tongue,
'Hold, friends! friends, part!' and swifter than his tongue,
mouse, a cat, to scratch a man to death! a braggart, a rogue,
Of my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true,
To help to take her from her borrowed grave,
Where that same banish'd runagate doth live,
What, rouse thee, man! Thy Juliet is alive,
Therefore do nimble-pinion'd doves draw Love,
O, I have bought the mansion of a love,
The fearful passage of their death-mark'd love,
Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,
My words would bandy her to my sweet love,
And not impute this yielding to light love,
Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,
Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,
Which, but their children's end, naught could remove,
I'll say yon grey is not the morning's eye,
Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye,
Take thou some new infection to thy eye,
Or if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,
And private in his chamber pens himself,
Lady. Here comes your father. Tell him so yourself,
Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,
By heaven, I love thee better than myself,
My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself,
That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,
We'll have no Cupid hoodwink'd with a scarf,
I have an interest in your hate's proceeding,
tall man! a very good whore!' Why, is not this a lamentable thing,
And little mouse, every unworthy thing,
She's not well married that lives married long,
Under yond yew tree lay thee all along,
And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,
For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,
But, like a misbhav'd and sullen wench,
To go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church,
The County Paris, at Saint Peter's Church,
I think you are happy in this second match,
And learn me how to lose a winning match,
Jul. Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
But now I see this one is one too much,
For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,
By her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh,
Rom. Is love a tender thing? It is too rough,
Rom. Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,
Your part in her you could not keep from death,
But with a rearward following Tybalt's death,
Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death,
Par. Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt's death,
This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath,
Death, that hath suck'd the honey of thy breath,
Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath,
Misshapen in the conduct of them both,
Thy father, or thy mother, nay, or both,
Par. Of honourable reckoning are you both,
Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
Gorg'd with the dearest morsel of the earth,
And shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth,
Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,
Seal'd up the doors, and would not let us forth,
Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth,
A grave? O, no, a lanthorn, slaught'red youth,
Thou sober-suited matron, all in black,
Sometimes she driveth o'er a soldier's neck,
Here in this city visiting the sick,
Enter Romeo, and Balthasar with a torch, a mattock,
In penalty alike; and 'tis not hard, I think,
For exile hath more terror in his look,
It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
Like powder in a skilless soldier's flask,
Cap. Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail,
Had part in this fair maid! now heaven hath all,
Which, like a usurer, abound'st in all,
I will withdraw; but this intrusion shall,
Having displeas'd my father, to Laurence' cell,
Hence will I to my ghostly father's cell,
Jul. I come, anon.- But if thou meanest not well,
Mer. Farewell, ancient lady. Farewell,
Rom. Alas that love, whose view is muffled still,
Run to my study.- By-and-by!- God's will,
Come Pentecost as quickly as it will,
But, let them measure us by what they will,
And then to have a wretched puling fool,
Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,
Par. O, I am slain! If thou be merciful,
And if we meet, we shall not scape a brawl,
Utter your gravity o'er a gossip's bowl,
Romeo's a dishclout to him. An eagle, madam,
I pray you tell my lord and father, madam,
Wilt thou not, Jule?' and, by my holidam,
Being in night, all this is but a dream,
O'er ladies' lips, who straight on kisses dream,
Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,
Who, raging with thy tears and they with them,
To hear him nam'd and cannot come to him,
Displant a town, reverse a prince's doom,
Nurse. Romeo can,
Rom. Amen, amen! But come what sorrow can,
No sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean,
Sojourn in Mantua. I'll find out your man,
Chief Watch. Here is a friar, and slaughter'd Romeo's man,
The gallant, young, and noble gentleman,
'Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
'A bears him like a portly gentleman,
On the forefinger of an alderman,
Her vestal livery is but sick and green,
Mon. Many a morning hath he there been seen,
Enter Father Capulet, Mother, Nurse, and Servingmen,
Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,
Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,
Where the infectious pestilence did reign,
But he which bore my letter, Friar John,
But one thing to rejoice and solace in,
To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
And with a silk thread plucks it back again,
How fares my Juliet? That I ask again,
Now Romeo is belov'd, and loves again,
If ever you disturb our streets again,
But to his foe suppos'd he must complain,
Which are the children of an idle brain,
Now, by the stock and honour of my kin,
The most you sought was her promotion,
Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,
Jul. O, swear not by the moon, th' inconstant moon,
And, Montague, come you this afternoon,
Or if thou thinkest I am too quickly won,
To grubs and eyeless skulls? As I discern,
Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,
Shot from the deadly level of a gun,
Some 'Juliet,' and some 'Paris'; and all run,
I- measuring his affections by my own,
Rom. I'll go along, no such sight to be shown,
That whiles Verona by that name is known,
And finding him, the searchers of the town,
Come, go with me. [To Servant, giving him a paper] Go,
In what I farther shall intend to do,
They say Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,
There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,
But by-and-by comes back to Romeo,
Nurse. Go, you cot-quean, go,
Mer. Help me into some house, Benvolio,
'Tis since the nuptial of Lucentio,
I bear no hatred, blessed man, for, lo,
Jul. Now by Saint Peter's Church, and Peter too,
And I, for winking at you, discords too,
O, now I would they had chang'd voices too,
Jul. O, shut the door! and when thou hast done so,
Helen and Hero hildings and harlots, This be a gray eye or so,
Par. My father Capulet will have it so,
Tickling a parson's nose as 'a lies asleep,
By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,
If in thy wisdom thou canst give no help,
More light, you knaves! and turn the tables up,
And now falls on her bed, and then starts up,
Prince. What misadventure is so early up,
A whispering tale in a fair lady's ear,
That presses them and learns them first to bear,
And lead you even to death. Meantime forbear,
Is Rosaline, that thou didst love so dear,
Rom. Lady, by yonder blessed moon I swear,
To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear,
Nurse. Even or odd, of all days in the year,
Now, afore God, this reverend holy friar,
An old hare hoar,
And an old hare hoar,
A whining mammet, in her fortune's tender,
Thou hast amaz'd me. By my holy order,
And in their triumph die, like fire and powder,
You, to remove that siege of grief from her,
This letter he early bid me give his father,
Doth not she think me an old murtherer,
mean to make bold withal, and, as you shall use me hereafter,
Bal. It doth so, holy sir; and there's my master,
This precious book of love, this unbound lover,
From off the battlements of yonder tower,
Which is as thin of substance as the air,
That idles in the wanton summer air,
Show me a mistress that is passing fair,
She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair,
Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair,
And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair,
One nickname for her purblind son and heir,
Nurse. Marry, bachelor,
But he, his own affections' counsellor,
Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,
I must hear from thee every day in the hour,
I warrant, an I should live a thousand yeas,
Is but a little way above our heads,
Green earthen pots, bladders, and musty seeds,
Jul. Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,
Therefore we'll have some half a dozen friends,
To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,
He swung about his head and cut the winds,
Jul. Conceit, more rich in matter than in words,
Prince. This letter doth make good the friar's words,
Do thou but close our hands with holy words,
That gallant spirit hath aspir'd the clouds,
Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,
And reason coldly of your grievances,
Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,
Jul. Good father, I beseech you on my knees,
Hath Death lain with thy wife. See, there she lies,
Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,
And Tybalt calls; and then on Romeo cries,
Thou mayst prove false. At lovers' perjuries,
Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes,
O'ercover'd quite with dead men's rattling bones,
Ben. Nay, he will answer the letter's master, how he dares,
Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,
Enter Prince [attended], Old Montague, Capulet, their Wives,
And slay thy lady that in thy life lives,
Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,
A beggarly account of empty boxes,
Need and oppression starveth in thine eyes,
Nurse. I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes,
Nor bide th' encounter of assailing eyes,
Find written in the margent of his eyes,
And needly will be rank'd with other griefs,
Her wagon spokes made of long spinners' legs,
Sailing in this salt flood; the winds, thy sighs,
On this fair corse, and, as the custom is,
Then, as the manner of our country is,
Pursu'd my humour, not Pursuing his,
Jul. Tell me not, friar, that thou hear'st of this,
Mon. O thou untaught! what manners is in this,
Jul. O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,
This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,
And fearest to die? Famine is in thy cheeks,
Hood my unmann'd blood, bating in my cheeks,
Culling of simples. Meagre were his looks,
Samp. 'Tis true; and therefore women, being the weaker vessels,
Rom. There is no world without Verona walls,
Our instruments to melancholy bells,
So early waking- what with loathsome smells,
Rom. There is thy gold- worse poison to men's souls,
She will not stay the siege of loving terms,
Rom. Not I; unless the breath of heartsick groans,
Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
And steal immortal blessing from her lips,
Which, as he breath'd defiance to my ears,
Where serpents are; chain me with roaring bears,
Environed with all these hideous fears,
The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,
To stop the inundation of her tears,
And since that time it is eleven years,
Some consequence, yet hanging in the stars,
Take him and cut him out in little stars,
And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish, hairs,
Thou shalt continue two-and-forty hours,
I should have been more strange, I must confess,
One who, to put thee from thy heaviness,
And doleful dumps the mind oppress,
So shall you share all that he doth possess,
Jul. Feeling so the loss,
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
An you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets,
O, she is lame! Love's heralds should be thoughts,
And madly play with my forefathers' joints,
His agile arm beats down their fatal points,
Stuff'd, as they say, with honourable parts,
Affliction is enanmour'd of thy parts,
Will they not hear? What, ho! you men, you beasts,
Nurse. Your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a courteous,
That unsubstantial Death is amorous,
O, pardon me for bringing these ill news,
While we were interchanging thrusts and blows,
These happy masks that kiss fair ladies' brows,
In tatt'red weeds, with overwhelming brows,
Jul. The tears have got small victory by that,
Her wagoner, a small grey-coated gnat,
And I will do it without fear or doubt,
It is my will; the which if thou respect,
But passion lends them power, time means, to meet,
What is it else? A madness most discreet,
Than twenty of their swords! Look thou but sweet,
Rom. And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget,
Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,
Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,
Forgive me, cousin.' Ah, dear Juliet,
I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,
Hath been my kinsman. O sweet Juliet,
Ben. Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet,
Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet,
Either be gone before the watch be set,
But look thou stay not till the watch be set,
The County will be here with music straight,
Against to-morrow. My heart is wondrous light,
And gave him what becomed love I might,
The horrible conceit of death and night,
Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night,
Friar. The grey-ey'd morn smiles on the frowning night,
It best agrees with night. Come, civil night,
Jul. What man art thou that, thus bescreen'd in night,
How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night,
O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,
I dreamt my master and another fought,
I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,
They have made worms' meat of me. I have it,
With Cupid's arrow. She hath Dian's wit,
Fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit,
Shall I not then be stifled in the vault,
And threat'ned me with death, going in the vault,
And where the worser is predominant,
Sleep for a week; for the next night, I warrant,
Many for many virtues excellent,
Examine every married lineament,
For though fond nature bids us all lament,
Each part, depriv'd of supple government,
Her body sleeps in Capel's monument,
Jul. Wash they his wounds with tears? Mine shall be spent,
Who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point,
Are made already mothers. By my count,
For it excels your first; or if it did not,
I fear it is; and yet methinks it should not,
were lustier than he is, and twenty such jacks; and if I cannot,
What's Montague? it is nor hand, nor foot,
And the place death, considering who thou art,
Howling attends it! How hast thou the heart,
As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,
Came more and more, and fought on part and part,
1. Serv. Away with the join-stools, remove the court-cubbert,
And I will take thy word. Yet, if thou swear'st,
Peer'd forth the golden window of the East,
This night I hold an old accustom'd feast,
That I will show you shining at this feast,
Friar. I am the greatest, able to do least,
Of a despised life, clos'd in my breast,
Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,
Is she not proud? Doth she not count her blest,
Whereto I have invited many a guest,
Nurse. There's no trust,
Her chariot is an empty hazelnut,
For stony limits cannot hold love out,
John. Going to find a barefoot brother out,
Cap. Tush, I will stir about,
quivers. Scurvy knave! Pray you, sir, a word; and, as I told you,
Wife. Well, think of marriage now. Younger than you,
And yet 'not proud'? Mistress minion you,
Taking thy part, hath rush'd aside the law,
Cap. When the sun sets the air doth drizzle dew,
With tears augmenting the fresh morning's dew,
Ben. Alas that love, so gentle in his view,
Compare her face with some that I shall show,
Methinks I see thee, now thou art below,
What is there? Now, fellow,
Are you at leisure, holy father, now,
And fall upon the ground, as I do now,
Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow,
Thy purpose marriage, send me word to-morrow,
Good night, good night! Parting is such sweet sorrow,
Shake, quoth the dovehouse! 'Twas no need, I trow,
We met, we woo'd, and made exchange of vow,
I'll frown, and be perverse, and say thee nay,
Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,
I'll tell thee as we pass; but this I pray,
Whose names are written there, and to them say,
Nurse. Is your man secret? Did you ne'er hear say,
Lies fest'ring in his shroud; where, as they say,
Hie you to church; I must another way,
To hear true shrift. Come, madam, let's away,
That she do give her sorrow so much sway,
Ben. Tut! you saw her fair, none else being by,
Go before, nurse. Commend me to thy lady,
Adversity's sweet milk, philosophy,
Mer. Yea, is the worst well? Very well took, i' faith! wisely,
Rom. This gentleman, the Prince's near ally,
Cap. God's bread I it makes me mad. Day, night, late, early,
Look you, she lov'd her kinsman Tybalt dearly,
It may be thought we held him carelessly,
Mer. Nay, an there were two such, we should have none shortly,
I have been feasting with mine enemy,
At home, abroad, alone, in company,
I promise you, but for your company,
From ancient grudge break to new mutiny,
I do remember an apothecary,
The day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry,
So far from sounding and discovery,
That book in many's eyes doth share the glory,
Which is the god of my idolatry,
Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury,
had a better love to berhyme her), Dido a dowdy, Cleopatra a gypsy,
But Romeo may not. More validity,
Away to heaven respective lenity,
Chor. Two households, both alike in dignity,
For beauty, starv'd with her severity,
Will now deny to dance? She that makes dainty,
Who, even in pure and vestal modesty,
All slain, all dead. 'Romeo is banished'-
Then music with her silver sound'-
'Proud'- and 'I thank you'- and 'I thank you not'-
Friar. [aside] I would I knew not why it should be slow'd.-
You must contrary me! Marry, 'tis time.-
Jul. By-and-by I come.-
Jul. [aside] Villain and he be many miles asunder.-
With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bow'd-
With Romeo till I behold him- dead-
But old folks, many feign as they were dead-
That living mortals, hearing them, run mad-
It is supposed the fair creature died-
And hide me with a dead man in his shroud-
Together with the terror of the place-
thee-
I do beseech thee-
This is she-
Cap. As rich shall Romeo's by his lady's lie-
Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble-
And keep her at my cell till Romeo come-
Jul. 'Tis almost morning. I would have thee gone-
Then love-devouring death do what he dare-
Rom. (rises) Nurse-
Is to himself- I will not say how true-
Mer. And, to sink in it, should you burthen love-
Rom. If my heart's dear love-
Being one too many by my weary self-
Nurse. I'll lay fourteen of my teeth-
Turn from their office to black funeral-
Profaners of this neighbour-stained steel-
Rom. So thrive my soul-
Proportion'd as one's thought would wish a man-
John. I could not send it- here it is again-
Like a rich jewel in an Ethiop's ear-
And yet, to my teen be it spoken, I have but four-
Mer. The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting fantasticoes-
Friar. A gentler judgment vanish'd from his lips-
That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops-
Or if not so, then here I hit it right-
At some hours in the night spirits resort-
Just opposite to what thou justly seem'st-
Rom. Out-
And bid her (mark you me?) on Wednesday next-
My house and welcome on their pleasure stay-
Jul. Yond light is not daylight; I know it, I.
Mer. And so did I.
Jul. Sweet, so would I.
ACT I. Scene I.
ACT II. Scene I.
ACT III. Scene I.
ACT V. Scene I.
ACT IV. Scene I.
Jul. And stint thou too, I pray thee, nurse, say I.
Scene II.
Scene II.
Scene II.
Scene II.
Scene II.
Scene III.
Scene III.
Scene III.
Scene III.
Scene III.
Scene VI.
Rom. Ay, nurse; what of that? Both with an R.
Scene V.
Scene V.
Scene V.
Scene V.
Scene IV.
Scene IV.
Scene IV.
Scene IV.
Enter Friar [Laurence].
Exeunt [Montague and Wife].
Exeunt [all but Juliet and Nurse].
Exeunt. Manent Musicians [and Nurse].
Enter Juliet again, [above].
Enter Paris and his Page with flowers and [a torch].
Wife. We follow thee.                       Exit [Servingman].
Knock [within].
Exeunt [all but Montague, his Wife, and Benvolio].
[Exit. [supported by Benvolio].
Exit [Friar].
Enter two other Servingmen [Abram and Balthasar].
Enter [some of the Watch,] with Romeo's Man [Balthasar].
Exit [Balthasar].
Enter Nurse [and Peter].
Enter Nurse and her Man [Peter].
Exeunt [Capulet and Paris].
Enter Montague [and others].
Enter Capulet and his Wife [with others].
and [others].
[with his Followers].
Enter the Prince [and Attendants].
She stabs herself and falls [on Romeo's body].
Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.
Escalus, Prince of Verona.
With all the admired beauties of Verona.
SCENE.--Verona; Mantua.
Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
And light thee on the way to Mantua.
My lord and you were then at Mantua.
As one dead in the bottom of a tomb.
Romeo opens the tomb.
The earth that's nature's mother is her tomb.
Doth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb.
For so he said he would.                         Play music.
Have lost a brace of kinsmen. All are punish'd.
Some five-and-twenty years, and then we mask'd.
Both you and I, for Romeo is exil'd.
Warm and new kill'd.
Since this same wayward girl is so reclaim'd.
From Love's weak childish bow she lives unharm'd.
For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pin'd.
I thought thy disposition better temper'd.
Rom. Why, then is my pump well-flower'd.
Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interr'd.
Cap. He shall be endur'd.
Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nurs'd.
Myself condemned and myself excus'd.
Rom. Tush, thou art deceiv'd.
To make confession and to be absolv'd.
Ben. I aim'd so near when I suppos'd you lov'd.
Is my poor heart so for a kinsman vex'd.
So that my speed to Mantua there was stay'd.
The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.
To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead.
For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead.
The sun for sorrow will not show his head.
Unwieldy, slow, heavy and pale as lead.
Torments him so that he will sure run mad.
The day is hot, the Capulets abroad.
My grave is like to be my wedding bed.
And, on my life, hath stol'n him home to bed.
More torches here! [Exeunt Maskers.] Come on then, let's to bed.
So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed.
1. Mus. Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.
Jul. Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.
second cup draws him on the drawer, when indeed there is no need.
Get thee to bed, and rest; for thou hast need.
They are free men, but I am banished.
Romeo that kill'd him, he is banished.
But Romeo may not- he is banished.
To comfort thee, though thou art banished.
Friar. Hence from Verona art thou banished.
And vice sometime's by action dignified.
As dearly as mine own, be satisfied.
And then I hope thou wilt be satisfied.
I'll know his grievance, or be much denied.
Who here hath lain this two days buried.
A plague o' both your houses! I am sped.
being dared.
Which the dark night hath so discovered.
Life and these lips have long been separated.
Enter Romeo's Man Balthasar, booted.
moved.
Samp. I strike quickly, being moved.
But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.
And all the better is it for the maid.
And bid me stand aloof, and so I did.
Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.
'A was a merry man) took up the child.
These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old.
Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold.
So thou wilt woo; but else, not for the world.
And follow thee my lord throughout the world.
That villain cousin would have kill'd my husband.
And Tybalt's dead, that would have slain my husband.
And, touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.
Friar. Hold thy desperate hand.
My dreams presage some joyful news at hand.
Cap. O brother Montague, give me thy hand.
Can I demand.
Nurse. [within] Let me come in, and you shall know my errand.
Greg. To move is to stir, and to be valiant is to stand.
Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end.
This but begins the woe others must end.
Rom. Farewell, farewell! One kiss, and I'll descend.
I cannot choose but ever weep the friend.
What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.
To-morrow will I send.
Friar. You say you do not know the lady's mind.
And soar with them above a common bound.
'To seek him here that means not to be found.
Holding thine ear close to the hollow ground.
Of that tongue's utterance, yet I know the sound.
In that word's death; no words can that woe sound.
1. Mus. Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.
Rom. He jests at scars that never felt a wound.
God.
And in despite I'll cram thee with more food.
Nor what is mine shall never do thee good.
And stole into the covert of the wood.
Capulet's orchard.
Capulet's orchard.
Capulet's orchard.
Capulet's orchard.
A lane by the wall of Capulet's orchard.
2. Watch. Here's Romeo's man. We found him in the churchyard.
Chief Watch. 'the ground is bloody. Search about the churchyard.
Rom. I would I were thy bird.
Jul. Love give me strength! and strength shall help afford.
Man. No, my good lord.
To Mantua, with my letters to thy lord.
Par. Monday, my lord.
Hear me with patience but to speak a word.
Lady. Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word.
Had I it written, I would tear the word.
Rom. I take thee at thy word.
Ah, where's my man? Give me some aqua vitae.
Jul. What must be shall be.
Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.
For men so old as we to keep the peace.
Wife. Enough of this. I pray thee hold thy peace.
By playing it to me with so sour a face.
Or never after look me in the face.
Being spoke behind your back, than to your face.
Rom. In faith, I will. Let me peruse this face.
And what I spake, I spake it to my face.
A public place.
Verona. A public place.
To old Freetown, our common judgment place.
Nurse. Peter, take my fan, and go before, and apace.
Then dreams he of another benefice.
Lies my consent and fair according voice.
Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice.
Mer. Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.
Music plays, and they dance.
Say either, and I'll stay the circumstance.
And thou dismemb'red with thine own defence.
Immediately we do exile him hence.
Shalt with him hence.
Or by the break of day disguis'd from hence.
Man. I do beseech you, sir, have patience.
And let mischance be slave to patience.
Enter Friar John to Friar Laurence.
Enter Friar Laurence.
But Romeo's name speaks heavenly eloquence.
Paris, a young Count, kinsman to the Prince.
And hear the sentence of your moved prince.
Mer. Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting; it is a most sharp sauce.
Par. Younger than she are happy mothers made.
Cap. And too soon marr'd are those so early made.
Enter Friar [Laurence], with lanthorn, crow, and spade.
For fair without the fair within to hide.
Rom. Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.
Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.
Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.
As he was coming from this churchyard side.
law on my side.
Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.
As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee.
Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee.
To Juliet's grave; for there must I use thee.
And I'll believe thee.
It were a grief so brief to part with thee.
Samp. My naked weapon is out. Quarrel! I will back thee.
That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.
Romeo, I come! this do I drink to thee.
Because it is an enemy to thee.
Jul. If they do see thee, they will murther thee.
two or three.
Nightly she sings on yond pomegranate tree.
Prince. Look, and thou shalt see.
Enter Old Capulet in his gown, and his Wife.
Enter Old Montague and his Wife.
And all those twenty could but kill one life.
That almost freezes up the heat of life.
But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.
Mer. A challenge, on my life.
Doth with their death bury their parents' strife.
And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife.
Cap. Soft! take me with you, take me with you, wife.
Jul. That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.
There stays a husband to make you a wife.
And she, there dead, that Romeo's faithful wife.
Thou knowest my daughter's of a pretty age.
Making them women of good carriage.
Rom. Ay, If I know the letters and the language.
To bid me trudge.
Than those that have more cunning to be strange.
Ben. Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.
Nurse. Mistress! what, mistress! Juliet! Fast, I warrant her, she.
That thou her maid art far more fair than she.
I must be gone and live, or stay and die.
This is thy sheath; there rest, and let me die.
And the rank poison of the old will die.
This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.
And so did I. Well, we were born to die.
Obey, and go with me; for thou must die.
Mer. That dreamers often lie.
Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.
Abr. You lie.
Jul. Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.
Rom. Then move not while my prayer's effect I take.
Within this three hours will fair Juliet wake.
Rom. Neither, fair saint, if either thee dislike.
Greg. But thou art not quickly moved to strike.
Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.
Either my eyesight fails, or thou look'st pale.
Is not so long as is a tedious tale.
Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.
Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
Nurse. I am aweary, give me leave awhile.
Jul. O Fortune, Fortune! all men call thee fickle.
a hole.
Par. So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.
Par. Do not deny to him that you love me.
And flourishes his blade in spite of me.
with me.
Graze where you will, you shall not house with me.
Or manage it to part these men with me.
Citizen. Up, sir, go with me.
But come, young waverer, come go with me.
Rom. What wilt thou tell her, nurse? Thou dost not mark me.
By leaving earth? Comfort me, counsel me.
And gladly shunn'd who gladly fled from me.
Friar. Stay then; I'll go alone. Fear comes upon me.
Wife. Nurse, where's my daughter? Call her forth to me.
Therefore thy kinsmen are no let to me.
Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.
Samp. A dog of the house of Montague moves me.
And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.
And this same needy man must sell it me.
I'll call them back again to comfort me.
full of woe.' O, play me some merry dump to comfort me.
Tyb. Why, uncle, 'tis a shame.
For such a wish! He was not born to shame.
With repetition of my Romeo's name.
Rom. It is my soul that calls upon my name.
We shall be much unfurnish'd for this time.
Jul. And joy comes well in such a needy time.
My lord, I'll tell my lady you will come.
For sweet discourses in our time to come.
Father. For shame, bring Juliet forth; her lord is come.
Is three long hours; yet she is not come.
Rom. Thou chid'st me oft for loving Rosaline.
Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline.
That you shall all repent the loss of mine.
Friar. For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.
It is enough I may but call her mine.
Rom. Th' exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine.
Rom. That last is true-the sweeter rest was mine.
Rom. By the hour of nine.
Ben. But new struck nine.
Till Holy Church incorporate two in one.
The game was ne'er so fair, and I am done.
In dear employment. Therefore hence, be gone.
We'll measure them a measure, and be gone.
1. Mus. Faith, we may put up our pipes and be gone.
Therefore stay yet; thou need'st not to be gone.
Cap. Go, begone.
I'll not to bed to-night; let me alone.
My lord, we must entreat the time alone.
As maids call medlars when they laugh alone.
Cap. Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone.
Enter Romeo alone.
My dismal scene I needs must act alone.
Enter Juliet alone.
Laur. Now, must I to the monument alone.
To such a greeting. Villain am I none.
I sell thee poison; thou hast sold me none.
May stand in number, though in reck'ning none.
M. Wife. Thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe.
My intercession likewise steads my foe.
I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe.
Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.
I have forgot that name, and that name's woe.
Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are.
Call Peter; he will show thee where they are.
If any of my kinsmen find thee here.
Jul. I would not for the world they saw thee here.
And but thou love me, let them find me here.
Jul. Madam, I am here.
And apprehend thee for a felon here.
Every good hap to you that chances here.
And death's pale flag is not advanced there.
Nurse. This afternoon, sir? Well, she shall be there.
If I departed not and left him there.
No, No! This shall forbid it. Lie thou there.
This is not Romeo, he's some other where.
That warns my old age to a sepulchre.
Ben. I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire.
Rom. By love, that first did prompt me to enquire.
Rom. Indeed I should have ask'd you that before.
Jul. No, no. But all this did I know before.
To call hers (exquisite) in question more.
It helps not, it prevails not. Talk no more.
One more, most welcome, makes my number more.
That, when she dies, with beauty dies her store.
1. Mus. Then will I give you the serving-creature.
Some misadventure.
Being the time the potion's force should cease.
I would adventure for such merchandise.
In thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose.
the goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.
there for the goose.
Nurse. Weeping and wailing over Tybalt's corse.
of that name, for fault of a worse.
Enter Capulet's Wife, and Nurse.
Enter Lady of the House and Nurse.
Enter Juliet and Nurse.
Exeunt Juliet and Nurse.
Enter Capulet and Nurse.
Exeunt Lady and Nurse.
Enter Nurse.
Enter Nurse.
Enter Nurse.
Lady. Hold, take these keys and fetch more spices, nurse.
Some comfort, nurse.
Peter, servant to Juliet's nurse.
And do not interrupt me in my course.
Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse.
Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
As I remember, this should be the house.
Her mother is the lady of the house.
Serv. To supper, to our house.
Hath sent a letter to his father's house.
Capulet's house.
Capulet's house.
Capulet's house.
Capulet's house.
Nurse. Peter, stay at the gate.
Cank'red with peace, to part your cank'red hate.
Supper is done, and we shall come too late.
Pet. Then will I lay the serving-creature's dagger on your pate.
Friar. Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.
The more I have, for both are infinite.
For it was bad enough before their spite.
And in the taste confounds the appetite.
Rom. O, let us hence! I stand on sudden haste.
And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.
Now do you know the reason of this haste.
Tyb. This, by his voice, should be a Montague.
Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.
For blood of ours shed blood of Montague.
Lady Montague, wife to Montague.
Romeo, son to Montague.
Abram, servant to Montague.
Anon, good nurse! Sweet Montague, be true.
Rom. In bed asleep, while they do dream things true.
Affection makes him false, he speaks not true.
Jul. I have.
And yet I wish but for the thing I have.
To lay one in, another out to have.
Jul. Not proud you have, but thankful that you have.
Taking the measure of an unmade grave.
To follow this fair corse unto her grave.
I'll bury thee in a triumphant grave.
I beg for justice, which thou, Prince, must give.
An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live.
Romeo slew Tybalt; Romeo must not live.
Enter Juliet above.
Rom. A right good markman! And she's fair I love.
To turn your households' rancour to pure love.
Here's much to do with hate, but more with love.
Mer. If love be rough with you, be rough with love.
Rom. Out of her favour where I am in love.
The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.
To live an unstain'd wife to my sweet love.
But thankful even for hate that is meant love.
One that you love.
Thou pout'st upon thy fortune and thy love.
Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.
Rom. And bad'st me bury love.
So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.
Unless good counsel may the cause remove.
Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye.
Mer. Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze.
To cease thy suit and leave me to my grief.
And none but fools do wear it. Cast it off.
Or in my cell there would she kill herself.
But, as it seems, did violence on herself.
Henceforward do your messages yourself.
But purgatory, torture, hell itself.
Friar. Arise; one knocks. Good Romeo, hide thyself.
Take all myself.
For I come hither arm'd against myself.
Jul. It is an honour that I dream not of.
Par. Give me thy torch, boy. Hence, and stand aloof.
gold for sounding.
For this night's watching.
Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.
hands, and they unwash'd too, 'tis a foul thing.
Too great oppression for a tender thing.
O, much I fear some ill unthrifty thing.
Thou talk'st of nothing.
an ill thing to be off'red to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing.
Rom. Give me a torch. I am not for this ambling.
Stay not to question, for the watch is coming.
Romeo is coming.
I'll have this knot knit up to-morrow morning.
Could to no issue of true honour bring.
Blubb'ring and weeping, weeping and blubbering.
For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.
Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.
Rom. Ay me! sad hours seem long.
And pity 'tis you liv'd at odds so long.
Ben. Soft! I will go along.
An if you leave me so, you do me wrong.
But she's best married that dies married young.
And yours, close fighting ere I did approach.
As signal that thou hear'st something approach.
The boy gives warning something doth approach.
Go, some of you; whoe'er you find attach.
Raise up the Montagues; some others search.
Enter [Paris's] Boy and Watch.
Rom. Swits and spurs, swits and spurs! or I'll cry a match.
Page. O Lord, they fight! I will go call the watch.
And then I ran away to call the watch.
Rom. Courage, man. The hurt cannot be much.
Being our kinsman, if we revel much.
Jul. As much to him, else is his thanks too much.
Jul. Well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much.
Mother. No, not till Thursday. There is time enough.
Mer. Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch. Marry, 'tis enough.
am a pretty piece of flesh.
Farewell. Buy food and get thyself in flesh.
One desperate grief cures with another's languish.
An I might live to see thee married once, I have my wish.
Rom. Let me be ta'en, let me be put to death.
Turn thee Benvolio! look upon thy death.
By some vile forfeit of untimely death.
Grief of my son's exile hath stopp'd her breath.
Or if he do, it needs must be by stealth.
cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.
will speak more in a minute than he will stand to in a month.
Nurse. And from my soul too; else beshrew them both.
Turn to another, this shall slay them both.
Friar. Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.
Nurse. Ay, forsooth.
Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.
Sole monarch of the universal earth.
She is the hopeful lady of my earth.
Turning his face to the dew-dropping South.
To be a virtuous and well-govern'd youth.
Nay, come, I pray thee speak. Good, good nurse, speak.
Friar. Thou fond mad man, hear me a little speak.
Ties up my tongue and will not let me speak.
I have forgot why I did call thee back.
But send him back.
Whiter than new snow upon a raven's back.
All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.
The curfew bell hath rung, 'tis three o'clock.
Ben. Two, two! a shirt and a smock.
What simpleness is this.- I come, I come!             Knock.
Mist-like infold me from the search of eyes.          Knock.
Thou wilt be taken.- Stay awhile!- Stand up;          Knock.
Under love's heavy burthen do I sink.
Friar. There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.
Jul. You kiss by th' book.
Nurse. See where she comes from shrift with merry look.
Jul. Then have my lips the sin that they have took.
Blind is his love and best befits the dark.
Must climb a bird's nest soon when it is dark.
Mer. If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
Of one I danc'd withal.
I nurs'd her daughter that you talk'd withal.
Too flattering-sweet to be substantial.
Come, vial.
Rom. Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel.
Rom. I warrant thee my man's as true as steel.
minstrel.
I have rememb'red me, thou's hear our counsel.
Nurse. Ah sir! ah sir! Well, death's the end of all.
Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.
Is it e'en so? Why then, I thank you all.
Rom. Go to! I say you shall.
wall.
Ben. He ran this way, and leapt this orchard wall.
from the wall and thrust his maids to the wall.
Sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall.
Rom. And stay, good nurse, behind the abbey wall.
Nell.
I'll to him; he is hid at Laurence' cell.
Go; I'll to dinner; hie you to the cell.
Friar Laurence's cell.
Friar Laurence's cell.
Friar Laurence's cell.
Friar Laurence's cell.
Verona. Friar Laurence's cell.
Look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.
Unto my cell.
This torture should be roar'd in dismal hell.
Thy love did read by rote, that could not spell.
Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell.
His help to crave and my dear hap to tell.
For nothing can be ill if she be well.
Ah, sirrah, this unlook'd-for sport comes well.
That you run mad, seeing that she is well.
That shall she, marry; I remember it well.
Jul. Madam, I am not well.
Jul. I' faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.
Bal. Here's one, a friend, and one that knows you well.
Nurse. You say well.
Farewell.
Jul. Hie to high fortune! Honest nurse, farewell.
And bid him come to take his last farewell.
Man. Then she is well, and nothing can be ill.
Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.
Move them no more by crossing their high will.
Bear hence this body, and attend our will.
Rom. Bid a sick man in sadness make his will.
Rom. I pay thy poverty and not thy will.
She shall be married to this noble earl.
But now I'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.
The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl.
I know not how to tell thee who I am.
Tyb. Follow me close, for I will speak to them.
Is death to any he that utters them.
As that the villain lives which slaughter'd him.
To the dead bodies. I will apprehend him.
I'll not endure him.
The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.
Jul. I will confess to you that I love him.
As living here and you no use of him.
Therefore be patient, take no note of him.
Either thou or I, or both, must go with him.
All our whole city is much bound to him.
I conjure only but to raise up him.
Ben. An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.
And that my master slew him.
Flower as she was, deflowered by him.
I bring thee tidings of the Prince's doom.
came you between us? I was hurt under your arm.
Ben. Strike, drum.
Friar Laurence, Franciscan.
Friar John, Franciscan.
Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean.
Stand up, stand up! Stand, an you be a man.
Lady. Find thou the means, and I'll find such a man.
Good gentle youth, tempt not a desp'rate man.
Friar. Romeo, come forth; come forth, thou fearful man.
Your worship in that sense may call him man.
Ben. Not to his father's. I spoke with his man.
For he hath still been tried a holy man.
Prince. We still have known thee for a holy man.
Tyb. Well, peace be with you, sir. Here comes my man.
Enter Servingman.
Exit Servingman.
Enter Friar [Laurence] and another Watchman.
In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.
Lord! she will be a joyful woman.
Mer. God ye good-den, fair gentlewoman.
Enter Mercutio, Benvolio, and Men.
Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.
Leap to these arms untalk'd of and unseen.
Come Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.
Wife. She's not fourteen.
Friar. Welcome then.
Jul. I will not fail. 'Tis twenty years till then.
Cap. Well, get you gone. A Thursday be it then.
iron wit, and put up my iron dagger. Answer me like men.
Ben. We talk here in the public haunt of men.
Women may fall when there's no strength in men.
Greg. The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.
Nurse. God ye good morrow, gentlemen.
master's kinsmen.
My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven.
Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign.
Laur. This same should be the voice of Friar John.
Give me a case to put my visage in.
Jul. But to be frank and give it thee again.
Rom. I'll tell thee ere thou ask it me again.
And yet I would it were to give again.
Ben. Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.
And then down falls again.
Jul. Farewell! God knows when we shall meet again.
No better term than this: thou art a villain.
The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.
Enter Prince Escalus, with his Train.
Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.
Samp. Let us take the law of our sides; let them begin.
Rom. For your broken shin.
Jul. Where is my mother? Why, she is within.
[Nurse] calls within.
To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.
Which, well thou knowest, is cross and full of sin.
Ben. Good morrow, cousin.
Where is my page? Go, villain, fetch a surgeon.
Bring forth the parties of suspicion.
occasion.
Mother. We shall be short in our provision.
Rom. Why, such is love's transgression.
Ben. At thy good heart's oppression.
Than thou went'st forth in lamentation.
So fearful were they of infection.
Rom. A most courteous exposition.
Peter. Anon.
Peter. Anon.
now upon the prick of noon.
Cap. Monday! ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon.
and a crow of iron.
Rom. Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.
So early walking did I see your son.
Nurse. I speak no treason.
Who, nothing hurt withal, hiss'd him in scorn.
Too rude, too boist'rous, and it pricks like thorn.
Boy. This is the place. There, where the torch doth burn.
In half an hour she 'promis'd to return.
Cap. Ready to go, but never to return.
To twinkle in their spheres till they return.
Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.
Or dedicate his beauty to the sun.
And pay no worship to the garish sun.
Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.
Jul. It may be so, for it is not mine own.
Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.
He goeth down.
Till she had laid it and conjur'd it down.
To see thy son and heir more early down.
Enter Capulet, County Paris, and [Servant] -the Clown.
1. Mus. No.
Rom. With Rosaline, my ghostly father? No.
Greg. [aside to Sampson] No.
Leave me and do the thing I bid thee do.
Put up your swords. You know not what you do.
Bal. Romeo.
Enter Friar [Laurence] and Romeo.
Enter Benvolio and Romeo.
Henceforth I never will be Romeo.
Tyb. Mercutio, thou consortest with Romeo.
Lady. That same villain Romeo.
Tyb. 'Tis he, that villain Romeo.
Mercutio, kinsman to the Prince and friend to Romeo.
Till I conveniently could send to Romeo.
Balthasar, servant to Romeo.
Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.
Enter Romeo.
Enter Romeo.
Enter Romeo.
Enter Romeo.
Enter Romeo.
Enter Romeo.
Enter Romeo.
Exit Romeo.
Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.
Mon. Thou villain Capulet!- Hold me not, let me go.
I have more care to stay than will to go.
But 'tis no wit to go.
I would have been abed an hour ago.
His son was but a ward two years ago.
But sadly tell me who.
Nurse. Marry, that, I think, be young Petruchio.
Exeunt Mercutio, Benvolio.
Enter Benvolio.
Enter Benvolio.
Nurse. The son and heir of old Tiberio.
Enter Benvolio and Mercutio.
Call, good Mercutio.
That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.
Enter Benvolio with Mercutio.
Prince. Romeo slew him; he slew Mercutio.
Mer. Nay, I'll conjure too.
Chief Watch. A great suspicion! Stay the friar too.
But thou slewest Tybalt. There art thou happy too.
Par. These times of woe afford no tune to woo.
Ere he that should be husband comes to woo.
You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.
I am content, so thou wilt have it so.
Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wills it so.
The other did not so.
Perchance she cannot meet him. That's not so.
Rom. Nay, that's not so.
Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto.
the two.
Serv. Up.
Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep.
This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep.
And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
Nightly shall be to strew, thy grave and weep.
Ben. No, coz, I rather weep.
Help, help! Call help.
Cap. Why, I am glad on't. This is well. Stand up.
Go waken Juliet; go and trim her up.
Rom. Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.
Jul. Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in pray'r.
That pierc'd the fearful hollow of thine ear.
I hear him near.
Greg. Ay, while you live, draw your neck out of collar.
remain, after the wearing, solely singular.
Rom. One, gentlewoman, that God hath made for himself to mar.
Nurse. Your lady mother is coming to your chamber.
Juliet's chamber.
Juliet's chamber.
sought for, in the great chamber.
Let not the nurse lie with thee in thy chamber.
An Officer.
take it, is a gentlemanlike offer.
Lays down a dagger.
occupy the argument no longer.
Ben. Be rul'd by me: forget to think of her.
And that we have a curse in having her.
Cap. Well, be may chance to do some good on her.
Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her.
Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her.
Enter Father.
Rom. Good morrow, father.
See thou deliver it to my lord and father.
Farewell, dear father.
Rom. I must indeed; and therefore came I hither.
Chief Watch. Hold him in safety till the Prince come hither.
Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.
Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
Romeo, will you come to your father's? We'll to dinner thither.
Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.
Montague, heads of two houses at variance with each other.
Capulet, heads of two houses at variance with each other.
Enter Mother.
Enter Mother.
Enter Mother.
Nurse. Your mother.
Jul. Who is't that calls? It is my lady mother.
mourners, and stay dinner.
Ben. She will endite him to some supper.
Nurse. My fan, Peter.
Enter Peter.
That we have had no time to move our daughter.
Madam, good night. Commend me to your daughter.
Receive in either by this dear encounter.
buy the fee simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.
And never trouble Peter for the matter.
Abr. No better.
Mer. Any man that can write may answer a letter.
Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.
2. Mus. I say 'silver sound' because musicians sound for silver.
To beautify him only lacks a cover.
Wife. Verona's summer hath not such a flower.
Rom. Pink for flower.
Nurse. Nay, he's a flower, in faith- a very flower.
And sails upon the bosom of the air.
Being black puts us in mind they hide the fair.
With tender Juliet match'd, is now not fair.
Mer. Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.
To merit bliss by making me despair.
They pray; grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.
thumb, sir.
Samp. I do bite my thumb, sir.
Since you did leave it for my office, sir.
Samp. Well, sir.
Abr. Quarrel, sir? No, sir.
Samp. Yes, better, sir.
Bal. I dare not, sir.
Serv. I know not, sir.
Nurse. Here is a ring she bid me give you, sir.
Nurse. Now God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir.
Which you weep for.
That thou expects not nor I look'd not for.
Rom. Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor.
That I reviv'd and was an emperor.
Jul. Good even to my ghostly confessor.
Bal. Full half an hour.
Nurse. Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.
the wall of any man or maid of Montague's.
And leave him all. Life, living, all is Death's.
Serv. My master's.
And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs.
These dead men's tombs.
their heads.
The vaulty heaven so high above our heads.
Samp. Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads.
Rom. Stay, fellow; I can read.                       He reads.
And see how he will take it at your hands.
Jul. Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands.
Play'd for a pair of stainless maidenhoods.
We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.
Nurse. Ay, ay, the cords.
Enter Nurse, with cords.
It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
Within thy help and holy physic lies.
In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.
Examine other beauties.
Prince. Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.
Exeunt omnes.
Juliet rises.
Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses.
Montagues.
Mer. Good King of Cats, nothing but one of your nine lives.
Lady. That is because the traitor murderer lives.
And her immortal part with angels lives.
Ben. This wind you talk of blows us from ourselves.
Ben. By giving liberty unto thine eyes.
He lent me counsel, and I lent him eyes.
Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
I conjure thee by Rosaline's bright eyes.
But every man betake him to his legs.
Prince. A glooming peace this morning with it brings.
He walks by them and sings.
And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.
logs.
To comfort you. I wot well where he is.
Nurse. Faith, here it is.
A peevish self-will'd harlotry it is.
Then be not poor, but break it and take this.
Cap. Send for the County. Go tell him of this.
This love feel I, that feel no love in this.
Prince. Then say it once what thou dost know in this.
Never was seen so black a day as this.
Forgetting any other home but this.
Enter Old Capulet, his Wife, and Paris.
Enter Friar, [Laurence] and County Paris.
Rom. She speaks.
I am too bold; 'tis not to me she speaks.
Lady. Ay, sir; but she will none, she gives you thanks.
Shall have the chinks.
Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.
And she steal love's sweet bait from fearful hooks.
But love from love, towards school with heavy looks.
Samp. Gregory, on my word, we'll not carry coals.
From forth day's path and Titan's fiery wheels.
Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die.          Falls.
They fight. Tybalt falls.
Driving back shadows over low'ring hills.
A hall, a hall! give room! and foot it, girls.
man to bow in the hams.
Three Musicians.
Enter Friar [Laurence] and the County [Paris], with Musicians.
Or, wanting that, with tears distill'd by moans.
partisans.
Enter Citizens.
Be shriv'd and married. Here is for thy pains.
Farewell. Be trusty, and I'll quit thy pains.
She [drinks and] falls upon her bed within the curtains.
Servingmen come forth with napkins.
Rom. Draw, Benvolio; beat down their weapons.
Among a sisterhood of holy nuns.
3. Watch. Here is a friar that trembles, sighs, and weeps.
To help me after? I will kiss thy lips.
Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.
Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.
Friar. O, then I see that madmen have no ears.
Thy old groans ring yet in mine ancient ears.
Being vex'd, a sea nourish'd with lovers' tears.
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
Par. Poor soul, thy face is much abus'd with tears.
2. Cap. By'r Lady, thirty years.
lick their fingers.
Enter Tybalt and others.
Greg. No, for then we should be colliers.
Time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers.
and Gentlewomen to the Maskers.
All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.
Torchbearers.
With baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers.
Is guilty of this lamentable chance! The lady stirs.
By having him making yourself no less.
In this so sudden business.
To-night she's mew'd up to her heaviness.
Farewell. Commend me to thy mistress.
And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.
To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.
Jul. Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.
Forbid this bandying in Verona streets.
Enter three or four [Fellows, with spits and logs and baskets.
Ben. By my head, here come the Capulets.
Verona. A churchyard; in it the monument of the Capulets.
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
Five times in that ere once in our five wits.
It strains me past the compass of my wits.
Attendants.
Apoth. My poverty but not my will consents.
If I did stay to look on his intents.
1. Mus. An you re us and fa us, you note us.
This doth not so, for she divideth us.
Or else depart. Here all eyes gaze on us.
Be not her maid, since she is envious.
And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous.
Chorus.
Enter Chorus.
Enter Chorus.
Jul. I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news.
They'll be in scarlet straight at any news.
As yonder lady o'er her fellows shows.
O, now be gone! More light and light it grows.
Wife. A fortnight and odd days.
For you and I are past our dancing days.
For in a minute there are many days.
Nurse. Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.
Juliet, the County stays.
I would say thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy teat.
Rom. This shall determine that.
Is thy news good or bad? Answer to that.
Rom. Your plantain leaf is excellent for that.
Rom. So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that.
Fellow. Things for the cook, sir; but I know not what.
This trick may chance to scathe you. I know what.
O dear account! my life is my foe's debt.
May prove a beauteous flow'r when next we meet.
A Street.
A street.
A street.
Mantua. A street.
Temp'ring extremities with extreme sweet.
A choking gall, and a preserving sweet.
By any other name would smell as sweet.
Farewell. Thou canst not teach me to forget.
He told me Paris should have married Juliet.
Came to this vault to die, and lie with Juliet.
As that of true and faithful Juliet.
Nurse to Juliet.
Enter Juliet.
Enter Juliet.
Enter Juliet.
Enter Juliet.
Enter Juliet.
I come from Lady Juliet.
Enter Friar, [Laurence] alone, with a basket.
And I'll no longer be a Capulet.
Enter Old Capulet.
of Capulet.
Lady Capulet, wife to Capulet.
Juliet, daughter to Capulet.
Sampson, servant to Capulet.
Gregory, servant to Capulet.
Tybalt, nephew to Lady Capulet.
Tybalt, nephew to Lady Capulet.
Of an old tear that is not wash'd off yet.
Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.
Mer. Right.
And hire those horses. I'll be with thee straight.
Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.
follow straight.
They fight.
They fight.
Have at thee, coward!                            They fight.
Being but heavy, I will bear the light.
This vault a feasting presence full of light.
Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light.
Good night.
I thank you, honest gentlemen. Good night.
Mother. Good night.
Give me thy hand. 'Tis late. Farewell; good night.
And makes himself an artificial night.
'Tis now near night.
For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.
To scorn at our solemnity this night.
To be consorted with the humorous night.
Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night.
But you shall bear the burthen soon at night.
Must be my convoy in the secret night.
That birds would sing and think it were not night.
fairly last night.
Our Romeo hath not been in bed to-night.
And hire posthorses. I will hence to-night.
Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee to-night.
For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night.
Rom. I dreamt a dream to-night.
'Tis very late; she'll not come down to-night.
I have no joy of this contract to-night.
It rains downright.
All in gore-blood. I swounded at the sight.
That one short minute gives me in her sight.
I will not entertain so bad a thought.
Par. Thy face is mine, and thou hast sland'red it.
Abate thy valour in the acting it.
Greg. They must take it in sense that feel it.
Prince. Give me the letter. I will look on it.
disgrace to them, if they bear it.
good to hear it.
Rom. Let me stand here till thou remember it.
Her eye discourses; I will answer it.
Ben. Romeo will answer it.
Mer. Thou hast most kindly hit it.
Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it.
Ben. A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.
Cap. So many guests invite as here are writ.
But much of grief shows still some want of wit.
2. Mus. Pray you put up your dagger, and put out your wit.
Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit.
Exit.
Exit.
Jul. A thousand times good night!                        Exit.
John. Brother, I'll go and bring it thee.                 Exit.
come and crush a cup of wine. Rest you merry!               Exit.
Till then, adieu, and keep this holy kiss.             Exit.
Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.            Exit.
If all else fail, myself have power to die.            Exit.
Nurse. Marry, I will; and this is wisely done.           Exit.
Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.           Exit.
Now seeming sweet, convert to bitt'rest gall.          Exit.
Trust to't. Bethink you. I'll not be forsworn.         Exit.
Poor living corse, clos'd in a dead man's tomb!        Exit.
With speedy help doth lend redress.'         [Exit.
The life of Tybalt.
Enter Tybalt.
Enter Tybalt.
Ben. There lies that Tybalt.
Take it in what sense thou wilt.
Friar. Go with me to the vault.
Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.
Brags of his substance, not of ornament.
Here in my house do him disparagement.
Rom. O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.
And turn'd that black word death to banishment.
When theirs are dry, for Romeo's banishment.
Not body's death, but body's banishment.
Yet nature's tears are reason's merriment.
It burneth in the Capels' monument.
To this same place, to this same monument.
With open outcry, toward our monument.
When it hoars ere it be spent.
None but for some, and yet all different.
As that is desperate which we would prevent.
Mer. Come between us, good Benvolio! My wits faint.
Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Come, let's away; the strangers all are gone.        Exeunt.
Be brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all.      Exeunt.
Ben. I'll pay that doctrine, or else die in debt.      Exeunt.
Lady. You are too hot.
And quench the fire, the room is grown too hot.
Samp. Fear me not.
Therefore farewell. I see thou knowest me not.
Mer. By my heel, I care not.
For here we need it not.
Uneven is the course; I like it not.
In all respects by me; nay more, I doubt it not.
This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.
Lady. We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not.
Nurse. I know not.
And what love can do, that dares love attempt.
Being tasted, slays all senses with the heart.
And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.
My will to her consent is but a part.
Till the Prince came, who parted either part.
Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.
Rom. Not having that which having makes them short.
Friar. On Thursday, sir? The time is very short.
Par. Thou wrong'st it more than tears with that report.
Mer. I am hurt.
Do lace the severing clouds in yonder East.
The unreasonable fury of a beast.
An ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.
This night you shall behold him at our feast.
(God save the mark!) here on his manly breast.
Friar. Wisely, and slow. They stumble that run fast.
man that hath a hair more or a hair less in his beard than thou hast.
Else, when he is found, that hour is his last.
Rom. I thought all for the best.
Ben. Away, be gone; the sport is at the best.
And she shall scant show well that now seems best.
Look to't, think on't; I do not use to jest.
Mer. I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.
I'll to my rest.
Rom. Ay, so I fear; the more is my unrest.
Tyb. It fits when such a villain is a guest.
Greg. I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as they list.
Spare not for cost.
The precious treasure of his eyesight lost.
ears ere it be out.
Jul. Then, window, let day in, and let life out.
Turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out.
The day is broke; be wary, look about.
Bal. [aside] For all this same, I'll hide me hereabout.
Par. That may be must be, love, on Thursday next.
Friar. That's a certain text.
you.
Bal. I will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.
Gentlemen, good den. A word with one of you.
Nurse. Madam, your mother craves a word with you.
Nurse. If you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with you.
Mer. O, then I see Queen Mab hath been with you.
Unplagu'd with corns will have a bout with you.
But, an you will not wed, I'll pardon you.
Rom. And trust me, love, in my eye so do you.
Jul. To answer that, I should confess to you.
And presently took post to tell it you.
Rom. I will follow you.
Henceforward I am ever rul'd by you.
Unto the rigour of severest law.
That thou hast done me; therefore turn and draw.
Samp. I mean, an we be in choler, we'll draw.
Enter Romeo and Juliet aloft, at the Window.
Enter Juliet above at a window.
Were thinly scattered, to make up a show.
Couple it with something; make it a word and a blow.
Samp. Draw, if you be men. Gregory, remember thy swashing blow.
Doth grace for grace and love for love allow.
Live, and be prosperous; and farewell, good fellow.
Whipp'd and tormented and- God-den, good fellow.
Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.
Friar. My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.
But I will watch you from such watching now.
Do I live dead that live to tell it now.
1. Mus. Not a dump we! 'Tis no time to play now.
We would as willingly give cure as know.
And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.
That I shall say good night till it be morrow.
Par. My lord, I would that Thursday were to-morrow.
As are behooffull for our state to-morrow.
Cap. Go, nurse, go with her. We'll to church to-morrow.
To marry Paris. Wednesday is to-morrow.
Are you so hot? Marry come up, I trow.
As all the world- why he's a man of wax.
Prepare her, wife, against this wedding day.
Jul. Wilt thou be gone? It is not yet near day.
Thou shalt be loggerhead. [Exit Fellow.] Good faith, 'tis day.
How is't, my soul? Let's talk; it is not day.
We waste our lights in vain, like lamps by day.
That thou consent to marry us to-day.
immortal passado! the punto reverse! the hay.
You are welcome, gentlemen! Come, musicians, play.
Right glad I am he was not at this fray.
Make haste, I say.
3. Mus. Faith, I know not what to say.
Ben. Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo's hand did stay.
Come, go, good Juliet. I dare no longer stay.
Hath thwarted our intents. Come, come away.
Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.
A madman's mercy bid thee run away.
Jul. Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.
For this time all the rest depart away.
Therefore, if thou art moved, thou runn'st away.
That we may call it early by-and-by.
2. Serv. Ay, boy, ready.
[sings] lady, lady, lady.
Rom. Commend me to thy lady.
And, if thou dar'st, I'll give thee remedy.
If what thou speak'st speak not of remedy.
I'll to the friar to know his remedy.
I charge thee in the Prince's name obey.
Pet. I will then give it you soundly.
wisely.
And bring in cloudy night immediately.
And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly.
Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.
An old Man, of the Capulet family.
If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully.
A perilous knock; and it cried bitterly.
And with this knife I'll help it presently.
That I must love a loathed enemy.
The only son of your great enemy.
Jul. 'Tis but thy name that is my enemy.
Staying for thine to keep him company.
Is my dear son with such sour company.
Rememb'ring how I love thy company.
Nurse. No, truly, sir; not a penny.
Whistle Boy.
Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy.
And turns it to exile. There art thou happy.
An Apothecary.
Enter Apothecary.
And all things change them to the contrary.
We cannot without circumstance descry.
Rom. Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.
Mer. But I'll be hang'd, sir, if he wear your livery.
Nurse. They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.
Mer. Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.
case as mine a man may strain courtesy.
Rom. Meaning, to cursy.
May be put from her by society.
And thou art wedded to calamity.
And I am proof against their enmity.
And yet not fall; so light is vanity.
Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
Ben. The date is out of such prolixity.
This is as't should be. Let me see the County.
I think it best you married with the County.
On Thursday next be married to this County.
So loving-jealous of his liberty.
His son is thirty.
Think true love acted simple modesty.
Not stepping o'er the bounds of modesty.
Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty.
Farewell, my coz.
Thou counterfeit'st a bark, a sea, a wind:
Rom. Tut! I have lost myself; I am not here:
Cap. But saying o'er what I have said before:
Thursday is near; lay hand on heart, advise:
Friar. Go hence; good night; and here stands all your state:
That you are now a maid. Thus then in brief:
Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back:
And art thou chang'd? Pronounce this sentence then:
This holy shrine, the gentle fine is this:
Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks:
Make haste! The bridegroom he is come already:
I am not I, if there be such an 'I';
Cry but 'Ay me!' pronounce but 'love' and 'dove';
Rom. Ha, banishment? Be merciful, say 'death';
Dost thou love me, I know thou wilt say 'Ay';
Look to the bak'd meats, good Angelica;
My fair niece Rosaline and Livia;
Her traces, of the smallest spider's web;
Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb;
What is her burying gave, that is her womb;
For 'twas your heaven she should be advanc'd;
Of all my buried ancestors are pack'd;
The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepar'd;
Call me but love, and I'll be new baptiz'd;
Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead;
A troubled mind drave me to walk abroad;
Come, cords; come, nurse. I'll to my wedding bed;
Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed;
Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed;
He made you for a highway to my bed;
Romeo, good night. I'll to my truckle-bed;
Nurse. Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished;
Some shall be pardon'd, and some punished;
Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled;
Prick'd from the lazy finger of a maid;
Lady. Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child;
That God had lent us but this only child;
Mon. Both by myself and many other friend;
Mon. Not Romeo, Prince; he was Mercutio's friend;
An you be mine, I'll give you to my friend;
Rom. This day's black fate on moe days doth depend;
We sucking on her natural bosom find;
Were of an age. Well, Susan is with God;
Friar. I'll give thee armour to keep off that word;
Bondage is hoarse and may not speak aloud;
And like her most whose merit most shall be;
In one respect I'll thy assistant be;
Jul. Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face;
After the prompter, for our entrance;
And bear this work of heaven with patience;
Like death when he shuts up the day of life;
A pair of star-cross'd lovers take their life;
Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age;
Is now the two hours' traffic of our stage;
Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change;
The earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she;
And where care lodges sleep will never lie;
You, Capulet, shall go along with me;
Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name;
Lady. Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time;
Mercutio and his brother Valentine;
Cap. Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone;
Fly hence and leave me. Think upon these gone;
To-morrow night look that thou lie alone;
A bump as big as a young cock'rel's stone;
Tyb. Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe;
Was woe enough, if it had ended there;
To meet her new beloved anywhere;
Mon. But I can give thee more;
Thou art uprous'd with some distemp'rature;
Shall keep his native progress, but surcease;
Friar. Hark, how they knock! Who's there? Romeo, arise;
Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse;
A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse;
Jul. The clock struck nine when I did send the nurse;
Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late;
Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite;
Rom. She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste;
Cap. Wife. He is a kinsman to the Montague;
Rom. And we mean well, in going to this masque;
Boy. He came with flowers to strew his lady's grave;
But to the earth some special good doth give;
And therefore have I little talk'd of love;
Therefore have done. Some grief shows much of love;
Through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love;
To answer 'I'll not wed, I cannot love;
Till thou shalt know the reason of my love;
Jul. I'll look to like, if looking liking move;
Herself pois'd with herself in either eye;
Friar. Ah, Juliet, I already know thy grief;
Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff;
And this distilled liquor drink thou off;
My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding;
Ben. Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning;
Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning;
The world affords no law to make thee rich;
In all her best array bear her to church;
Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh;
Killing that love which thou hast vow'd to cherish;
One pain is lessoned by another's anguish;
Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death;
Their course of love, the tidings of her death;
Bal. I brought my master news of Juliet's death;
They are but beggars that can count their worth;
Jul. That is no slander, sir, which is a truth;
A pack of blessings light upon thy back;
Delay this marriage for a month, a week;
Friar. Come, come with me, and we will make short work;
Jul. Do not swear at all;
She would be as swift in motion as a ball;
Nurse. Then hie you hence to Friar Laurence' cell;
O friar, the damned use that word in hell;
The heavens do low'r upon you for some ill;
In man as well as herbs- grace and rude will;
Friar. Sir, go you in; and, madam, go with him;
And by-and-by my master drew on him;
Her whip, of cricket's bone; the lash, of film;
Digressing from the valour of a man;
anger her sometimes, and tell her that Paris is the properer man;
It is too rash, too unadvis'd, too sudden;
On Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen;
And find delight writ there with beauty's pen;
That murd'red me. I would forget it fain;
We must talk in secret. Nurse, come back again;
My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain;
Chief Watch. Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain;
Could draw to part them, was stout Tybalt slain;
Pitiful sight! here lies the County slain;
Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin;
I'll be a candle-holder and look on;
Some say the lark makes sweet division;
Some means to come to shrift this afternoon;
Rom. It was the lark, the herald of the morn;
The lady widow of Vitruvio;
Ben. Groan? Why, no;
Therefore love moderately: long love doth so;
We'll keep no great ado- a friend or two;
Athwart men's noses as they lie asleep;
Live here in heaven and may look on her;
Doth make against me, of this direful murther;
Scaring the ladies like a crowkeeper;
Poison hath residence, and medicine power;
And young affection gapes to be his heir;
Death is my son-in-law, Death is my heir;
2. Cap. 'Tis more, 'tis more! His son is elder, sir;
Mer. No, 'tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a church door;
God join'd my heart and Romeo's, thou our hands;
Signior Placentio and His lovely nieces;
O'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees;
In plants, herbs, stones, and their true qualities;
Sharp misery had worn him to the bones;
Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires;
I will be deaf to pleading and excuses;
Citizens of Verona; Gentlemen and Gentlewomen of both houses;
Being purg'd, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes;
Some say the lark and loathed toad chang'd eyes;
Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things;
Love is a smoke rais'd with the fume of sighs;
Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs;
Rom. Not mad, but bound more than a madman is;
Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
Love goes toward love as schoolboys from their books;
Alike bewitched by the charm of looks;
Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels;
Rom. With love's light wings did I o'erperch these walls;
With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls;
Her collars, of the moonshine's wat'ry beams;
Mer. True, I talk of dreams;
Nurse. O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps;
She hath not seen the change of fourteen years;
'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years;
Enter Romeo, Mercutio, Benvolio, with five or six other Maskers;
The cover, of the wings of grasshoppers;
Mine uncle Capulet, his wife, and daughters;
'Signior Martino and his wife and daughters;
County Anselmo and his beauteous sisters;
Go, tell the Prince; run to the Capulets;
Hath had no notice of these accidents;
Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet;
On the fair daughter of rich Capulet;
Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift;
O'er courtiers' knees, that dream on cursies straight;
Check'ring the Eastern clouds with streaks of light;
And therefore thou mayst think my haviour light;
I am the drudge, and toil in your delight;
Come, gentle night; come, loving, black-brow'd night;
Come, night; come, Romeo; come, thou day in night;
I pray thee leave me to myself to-night;
Rom. I have night's cloak to hide me from their sight;
That cop'st with death himself to scape from it;
To bear a poison, I would temper it;
Jul. I gave thee mine before thou didst request it;
Upon his brow shame is asham'd to sit;
And then dreams he of smelling out a suit;
Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit;
Signior Valentio and His cousin Tybalt;
Came I to take her from her kindred's vault;
Is very good meat in Lent;
And know their spring, their head, their true descent;
And see how one another lends content;
He heareth not, he stirreth not, be moveth not;
Art thou a man? Thy form cries out thou art;
But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart;
God pardon him! I do, with all my heart;
For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part;
Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lov'st;
Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast;
With piercing steel at bold Mercutio's breast;
No warmth, no breath, shall testify thou livest;
She could have run and waddled all about;
That he dares ne'er come back to challenge you;
And let the nurse this night sit up with you;
The world is not thy friend, nor the world's law;
Which with sweet water nightly I will dew;
For even the day before, she broke her brow;
'Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia's brow;
Lady. I will, and know her mind early to-morrow;
Of all the days of the year, upon that day;
Happiness courts thee in her best array;
This may flies do, when I from this must fly;
Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily;
That he shall soon keep Tybalt company;
That in gold clasps locks in the golden story;
Begot of nothing but vain fantasy;
Banish'd the new-made bridegroom from this city;
But 'banished' to kill me- 'banished'?
To mangle me with that word 'banished'?
Why 'silver sound'? Why 'music with her silver sound'?
Why should you fall into so deep an O?
Which modern lamentation might have mov'd?
Let me be satisfied, is't good or bad?
Is Romeo slaught'red, and is Tybalt dead?
What if her eyes were there, they in her head?
Serv. God gi' go-den. I pray, sir, can you read?
Ben. Why, Romeo, art thou mad?
Lady. Fie, fie! what, are you mad?
Cap. What should it be, that they so shriek abroad?
Jul. Now, good sweet nurse- O Lord, why look'st thou sad?
You are a saucy boy. Is't so, indeed?
Rom. O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?
How stands your disposition to be married?
Jul. O God!- O nurse, how shall this be prevented?
Jul. Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
What's here? A cup, clos'd in my true love's hand?
Jul. Art thou gone so, my lord, my love, my friend?
Rom. What hast thou found?
Jul. O God! Did Romeo's hand shed Tybalt's blood?
My dear-lov'd cousin, and my dearer lord?
Jul. O comfortable friar! where is my lord?
Wife. A crutch, a crutch! Why call you for a sword?
Apoth. Who calls so loud?
Mer. Where the devil should this Romeo be?
He'll fright you up, i' faith. Will it not be?
'Yea,' quoth he, 'dost thou fall upon thy face?
'Yea,' quoth my husband, 'fall'st upon thy face?
Sirrah, what made your master in this place?
Jul. By whose direction found'st thou out this place?
Jul. What's he that follows there, that would not dance?
What, is my daughter gone to Friar Laurence?
To Lammastide?
Rom. What, shall I groan and tell thee?
Shall I send to thee?
Ben. For what, I pray thee?
Have you delivered to her our decree?
you read anything you see?
Thy tempest-tossed body. How now, wife?
What further woe conspires against mine age?
Tybalt, that murtherer, which way ran he?
Nurse. Jesu, what haste! Can you not stay awhile?
note me?
What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?
Tyb. What wouldst thou have with me?
1. Mus. What a pestilent knave is this same?
come?
What, have you din'd at home?
Friar. God pardon sin! Wast thou with Rosaline?
For who is living, if those two are gone?
Nurse!- What should she do here?
Where shall we dine? O me! What fray was here?
Mother. What noise is here?
Rom. Can I go forward when my heart is here?
Friar. How long hath he been there?
Have my old feet stumbled at graves! Who's there?
The stony entrance of this sepulchre?
Jul. How cam'st thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?
sure, I have in my whole five. Was I with you there for the goose?
Rom. And is it not, then, well serv'd in to a sweet goose?
Jul. Nurse?
Where is my father and my mother, nurse?
Rom. What say'st thou, my dear nurse?
Ben. My noble uncle, do you know the cause?
Rom. What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?
Rom. Whose house?
To cross my obsequies and true love's rite?
Will you be ready? Do you like this haste?
Ben. Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?
Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?
Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?
To press before thy father to a grave?
Mer. The slip, sir, the slip. Can you not conceive?
Wife. Speak briefly, can you like of Paris' love?
Rom. Would'st thou withdraw it? For what purpose, love?
My conceal'd lady to our cancell'd love?
Ben. Of love?
Ben. In love?
Ben. Tell me in sadness, who is that you love?
Sweet, sweet, Sweet nurse, tell me, what says my love?
Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?
That sees into the bottom of my grief?
Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?
By doing damned hate upon thyself?
Hast thou slain Tybalt? Wilt thou slay thyself?
Cap. How now, my headstrong? Where have you been gadding?
Is he gone and hath nothing?
What say you, Simon Catling?
Shall I be married then to-morrow morning?
Rom. Is the day so young?
Mon. Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
Friar. Come, is the bride ready to go to church?
Where is the County's page that rais'd the watch?
That Romeo bid thee fetch?
Dost thou not laugh?
In mortal paradise of such sweet flesh?
Can vengeance be pursu'd further than death?
Lady. Evermore weeping for your cousin's death?
And sayest thou yet that exile is not death?
Do you not see that I am out of breath?
To say to me that thou art out of breath?
Why railest thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth?
Nurse. May not one speak?
Pet. Pretty! What say You, Hugh Rebeck?
Tybalt, you ratcatcher, will you walk?
Mer. Why, may one ask?
Were in a mask?
So stumblest on my counsel?
What if this mixture do not work at all?
How doth my lady? Is my father well?
What is your will?
Jul. What villain, madam?
Rom. What less than doomsday is the Prince's doom?
So worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom?
Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?
Jul. Come hither, nurse. What is yond gentleman?
Wife. What say you? Can you love the gentleman?
Nurse. Is it good-den?
All this is comfort; wherefore weep I then?
Friar. That's my good son! But where hast thou been then?
Pet. You will not then?
What, dress'd, and in your clothes, and down again?
Jul. O, think'st thou we shall ever meet again?
Rom. Alive in triumph, and Mercutio slain?
Nurse. Will you speak well of him that kill'd your cousin?
But wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?
Greg. How? turn thy back and run?
With blood remov'd but little from her own?
young Romeo?
Laur. Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?
Because he married me before to Romeo?
Where is my lady's lord, where's Romeo?
Welcome from Mantua. What says Romeo?
Jul. Here's such a coil! Come, what says Romeo?
Jul. O Romeo, Romeo! wherefore art thou Romeo?
And there I am. Where is my Romeo?
Come, shall we go?
Citizen. Which way ran he that kill'd Mercutio?
Romeo! O, pale! Who else? What, Paris too?
Rom. Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?
Cap. How canst thou try them so?
Said he not so? or did I dream it so?
Cap. Why, how now, kinsman? Wherefore storm you so?
Ben. And what to?
What are they, I beseech your ladyship?
Mother. What, are you busy, ho? Need you my help?
Lady. [within] Ho, daughter! are you up?
Rom. My dear?
Hast thou no letters to me from the friar?
Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar?
News from Verona! How now, Balthasar?
Rom. Spakest thou of Juliet? How is it with her?
Par. Come you to make confession to this father?
What unaccustom'd cause procures her hither?
Rom. Whither?
Rom. What is her mother?
is your mother?
Mother. What is the matter?
with a letter?
Where I may read who pass'd that passing fair?
Greg. Do you quarrel, sir?
Abr. Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
Abr. Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
Jul. What's he that now is going out of door?
Thee here in dark to be his paramour?
Greg. The heads of the maids?
Tyb. What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?
What curious eye doth quote deformities?
And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?
Is this the poultice for my aching bones?
Rom. How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?
Where's Romeo's man? What can he say in this?
Nurse. What's this? what's this?
And doth it give me such a sight as this?
Cap. How, how, how, how, choplogic? What is this?
But, soft! what day is this?
Rom. [aside] Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?
But soft! What light through yonder window breaks?
How? Will she none? Doth she not give us thanks?
Jul. How now? Who calls?
Ben. Have you importun'd him by any means?
As with a club dash out my desp'rate brains?
Prince. What fear is this which startles in our ears?
What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
How now? a conduit, girl? What, still in tears?
Ben. It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?
Rom. Well, what was yours?
1. Mus. What will you give us?
Mer. And but one word with one of us?
Jul. What devil art thou that dost torment me thus?
Jul. Can heaven be so envious?
O God, she comes! O honey nurse, what news?
Nurse. What?
Cap. Will you tell me that?
She speaks, yet she says nothing. What of that?
What says he of our marriage? What of that?
Jul. Madam, in happy time! What day is that?
Ben. The what?
Rom. Good heart, at what?
Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?
Lady. Why, how now, Juliet?
Rom. Is she a Capulet?
Came he not home to-night?
Jul. What satisfaction canst thou have to-night?
hand Of yonder knight?
When I, thy three-hours wife, have mangled it?
Cap. Young Romeo is it?
Friar. Who is it?
But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?
butt-shaft; and is he a man to encounter Tybalt?
Ben. Why, what is Tybalt?
That I yet know not?
Jul. Speak'st thou this from thy heart?
Ben. What, art thou hurt?
Was that my father that went hence so fast?
That calls our person from our morning rest?
Pet. Pretty too! What say you, James Soundpost?
Rom. Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did I give you?
Ben. Am I like such a fellow?
She I'll swear hath corns. Am I come near ye now?
As you think fit to furnish me to-morrow?
Samp. [aside to Gregory] Is the law of our side if I say ay?
M. Wife. O, where is Romeo? Saw you him to-day?
Nurse. Have you got leave to go to shrift to-day?
And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?
Prince. Where are the vile beginners of this fray?
Prince. Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?
Ben. Why dost thou stay?
Chief Watch. [within] Lead, boy. Which way?
1. Serv. Where's Potpan, that he helps not to take away?
Two may keep counsel, putting one away?
Rom. What shall I swear by?
Or shall we on without apology?
Is she not down so late, or up so early?
To sunder his that was thine enemy?
What say'st thou? Hast thou not a word of joy?
Jul. What storm is this that blows so contrary?
was this that was so full of his ropery?
To murther, murther our solemnity?
To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?
THE END
PROLOGUE
THE PROLOGUE
my young lady bid me enquire you out. What she bid me say, I
good soul, had as lieve see a toad, a very toad, as see him. I
Nurse. Ah, mocker! that's the dog's name. R is for the- No; I
And hither shall he come; and he and I
How long is't now since last yourself and I
A visor for a visor! What care I
And to't they go like lightning; for, ere I
Samp. Me they shall feel while I am able to stand; and 'tis known I
Mer. O, thou art deceiv'd! I would have made it short; for I
Nurse. I will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as I
That I
A lightning before death. O, how may I
[Lays him in the tomb.]
To lie discolour'd by this place of peace? [Enters the tomb.]
[Exit Page.]
Exeunt [Mother and Nurse.]
[Enter Nurse.]
[Exeunt some of the Watch.]
[Exeunt others of the Watch.]
To make me die with a restorative.             [Kisses him.]
[Exit a Servingman.]
[Throws them down.]
[Snatches Romeo's dagger.]
The hateful mansion.                     [Draws his dagger.]
Give me my sin again.                          [Kisses her.]
Thus from my lips, by thine my sin is purg'd.  [Kisses her.]
[Exit Peter.]
Ben. Part, fools! [Beats down their swords.]
Open the tomb, lay me with Juliet.                   [Dies.]
His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt.        [Retires.]
What, with a torch? Muffle me, night, awhile.     [Retires.]
Here in the churchyard; yet I will adventure.     [Retires.]
[Exit. Paris falls.]
[Draws aside the curtains.]
Tyb. I am for you.                                    [Draws.]
Alla stoccata carries it away.                      [Draws.]
[They fight.]
[Climbs the wall and leaps down within it.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
Stay but a little, I will come again.                [Exit.]
For well you know this is a pitiful case.            [Exit.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
But to rejoice in splendour of my own.              [Exeunt.]
They march about the stage. [Exeunt.]
a
world. A plague o' both your houses! Zounds, a dog, a rat, a
than any man's, yet his leg excels all men's; and for a hand and a
art as well as by nature. For this drivelling love is like a
Rom. Pardon, good Mercutio. My business was great, and in such a
addle as an egg for quarrelling. Thou hast quarrell'd with a
for one would kill the other. Thou! why, thou wilt quarrel with a
that hath lain asleep in the sun. Didst thou not fall out with a
Mer. That's as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains a
'a
And then in post he came from Mantua
And sleeps again. This is that very Mab
And weep ye now, seeing she is advanc'd
But in that crystal scales let there be weigh'd
O Prince! O husband! O, the blood is spill'd
Of my child's love. I think she will be rul'd
In my behalf- my reputation stain'd
To you and your behests, and am enjoin'd
For 'tis a throne where honour may be crown'd
As violently as hasty powder fir'd
Lest in this marriage he should be dishonour'd
I dreamt my lady came and found me dead
Young son, it argues a distempered head
But not another sin upon my head
will keep to myself; but first let me tell ye, if ye should lead
With nimble soles; I have a soul of lead
So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread
Or if you do not, make the bridal bed
To have her match'd; and having now provided
And usest none in that true use indeed
In this resolve. I'll send a friar with speed
Jul. Indeed I never shall be satisfied
Your high displeasure. All this- uttered
And hereabouts 'a dwells, which late I noted
I wonder at this haste, that I must wed
Your lady's love against some other maid
so much on the new form that they cannot sit at ease on the old
Ben. An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man should
Maskers, Torchbearers, Pages, Guards, Watchmen, Servants, and
my young lady ask'd for, the nurse curs'd in the pantry, and
behaviour, as they say; for the gentlewoman is young; and
the confines of a tavern, claps me his sword upon the table and
thou loves me, let the porter let in Susan Grindstone and
Rom. A gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself talk and
1. Serv. You are look'd for and call'd for, ask'd for and
Did murther her; as that name's cursed hand
On the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand
Rom. If I profane with my unworthiest hand
What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand
Of some strange nature, letting it there stand
The measure done, I'll watch her place of stand
flies, these fashion-mongers, these pardona-mi's, who stand
My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand
When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend
Lady. So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend
The law, that threat'ned death, becomes thy friend
And from her womb children of divers kind
To soar with his light feathers; and so bound
Throw your mistempered weapons to the ground
'Then music with her silver sound
Tyb. Romeo, the love I bear thee can afford
Tyb. What, drawn, and talk of peace? I hate the word
'Romeo is banished'- to speak that word
Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word
Dramatis Personae
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
Italy; and as soon moved to be moody, and as soon moody to be
Yet most suspected, as the time and place
Either withdraw unto some private place
An she agree, within her scope of choice
Jul. Hist! Romeo, hist! O for a falconer's voice
Prince. And for that offence
Betroth'd and would have married her perforce
The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
The fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride
Let two more summers wither in their pride
Rom. Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee
And Paris too. Come, I'll dispose of thee
Within this hour my man shall be with thee
For fear of that I still will stay with thee
O, what more favour can I do to thee
Now will he sit under a medlar tree
Miscarried by my fault, let my old life
An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life
'Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife
All this I know, and to the marriage
And in his wisdom hastes our marriage
Doth much excuse the appertaining rage
That quench the fire of your pernicious rage
grandsir, that we should be thus afflicted with these strange
And here I stand, both to impeach and purge
flowed in. Laura, to his lady, was but a kitchen wench (marry, she
of the very first house, of the first and second cause. Ah, the
wench's black eye; shot through the ear with a love song; the
soon as another man, if I see occasion in a good quarrel, and the
quoth 'a? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I may find the
says 'God send me no need of thee!' and by the operation of the
Rom. [to a Servingman] What lady's that, which doth enrich the
Greg. That shows thee a weak slave; for the weakest goes to the
2. Mus. Hang him, Jack! Come, we'll in here, tarry for the
Mer. More than Prince of Cats, I can tell you. O, he's the
Pet. No money, on my faith, but the gleek. I will give you the
My daughter he hath wedded. I will die
Be not so long to speak. I long to die
Mer. Consort? What, dost thou make us minstrels? An thou make
Samp. A dog of that house shall move me to stand. I will take
Then is it likely thou wilt undertake
Or, if I live, is it not very like
Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke
As in a vault, an ancient receptacle
To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle
When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
Where on a sudden one hath wounded me
One of our order, to associate me
Tyb. You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an you will give me
Towards him I made; but he was ware of me
Come, cordial and not poison, go with me
To County Paris. Then comes she to me
Prodigious birth of love it is to me
Nurse. Now, afore God, I am so vexed that every part about me
I drew to part them. In the instant came
And here is come to do some villanous shame
Rom. By a name
Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name
Wife. Marry, that 'marry' is the very theme
Where thou shalt live till we can find a time
But when I came, some minute ere the time
And he shall signify from time to time
Cap. My sword, I say! Old Montague is come
And all combin'd, save what thou must combine
But I'll amerce you with so strong a fine
And he will make the face of heaven so fine
And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine
Jesu Maria! What a deal of brine
And, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone
Rom. No matter. Get thee gone
Page. [aside] I am almost afraid to stand alone
Return'd my letter back. Then all alone
For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone
In shape no bigger than an agate stone
For never was a story of more woe
with his nets; but I am sent to find those persons whose names are
And go, Sir Paris. Every one prepare
Which she hath prais'd him with above compare
With worms that are thy chambermaids. O, here
By holy Laurence to fall prostrate here
and a kind, and a handsome; and, I warrant, a virtuous- Where
Your first is dead- or 'twere as good he were
O, Romeo, that she were, O that she were
therefore, if you should deal double with her, truly it were
If thou art Dun, we'll draw thee from the mire
Is too much for a score
Be heap'd like mine, and that thy skill be more
And that bare vowel 'I' shall poison more
This is my daughter's jointure, for no more
Where, underneath the grove of sycamore
Therefore thy earliness doth me assure
Rom. Bid her devise
But love thee better than thou canst devise
Do thou but call my resolution wise
A cold and drowsy humour; for no pulse
What's in a name? That which we call a rose
But he that hath the steerage of my course
A precious ring- a ring that I must use
Suspecting that we both were in a house
Enter Sampson and Gregory (with swords and bucklers) of the house
Capulet's house
This dagger hath mista'en, for, lo, his house
Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
My life were better ended by their hate
Afore me, It is so very very late
Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
Mer. Alas, poor Romeo, he is already dead! stabb'd with a white
A villain, that is hither come in spite
What doth her beauty serve but as a note
Thy tears are womanish, thy wild acts denote
Par. This is that banish'd haughty Montague
Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue
This neighbour air, and let rich music's tongue
Jul. Blister'd be thy tongue
But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true
Samp. 'Tis all one. I will show myself a tyrant. When I have
Hold, there is forty ducats. Let me have
Fetch me my rapier, boy. What, dares the slave
Friar. Not in a grave
Or bid me go into a new-made grave
Why art thou yet so fair? Shall I believe
For naught so vile that on the earth doth live
Of this day's journey, and from nine till twelve
Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love
To fetch a ladder, by the which your love
Black and portentous must this humour prove
For this alliance may so happy prove
warrant him, as gentle as a lamb. Go thy ways, wench; serve
Rom. I doubt it not; and all these woes shall serve
Thou cut'st my head off with a golden axe
Go thither, and with unattainted eye
Rom. Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
Rom. When the devout religion of mine eye
But no more deep will I endart mine eye
Non, ere the sun advance his burning eye
Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye
In carrion flies than Romeo. They may seize
That murd'red my love's cousin- with which grief
Who is already sick and pale with grief
fought with the men, I will be cruel with the maids- I will cut off
In these confusions. Heaven and yourself
They are all forth; well, I will walk myself
her into a fool's paradise, as they say, it were a very gross kind of
Mer. Good Peter, to hide her face; for her fan's the fairer face of
been poor-John. Draw thy tool! Here comes two of the house of
Whate'er thou hearest or seest, stand all aloof
Romeo is banish'd; and all the world to nothing
At the prefixed hour of her waking
Hold, take this letter. Early in the morning
courageous captain of compliments. He fights as you sing
Tyb. Patience perforce with wilful choler meeting
Mer. Could you not take some occasion without giving
For then I hope thou wilt not keep him long
Where Juliet lives; and every cat and dog
man for coughing in the street, because he hath wakened thy dog
but not to the purpose. Signior Romeo, bon jour! There's a French
Mer. O, here's a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an inch
art thou fishified! Now is he for the numbers that Petrarch
Nurse. Yes, madam. Yet I cannot choose but laugh
Stand not amaz'd. The Prince will doom thee death
Why I descend into this bed of death
How oft when men are at the point of death
And fearfully did menace me with death
And in this borrowed likeness of shrunk death
O love! O life! not life, but love in death
Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt's death
Lady. Well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death
Was Tybalt's doomsday, whose untimely death
And that the trunk may be discharg'd of breath
Friar. I will be brief, for my short date of breath
Jul. How art thou out of breath when thou hast breath
To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
Tybalt, Mercutio, the Prince expressly hath
And drink it off, and if you had the strength
tailor for wearing his new doublet before Easter, with
clout in the versal world. Doth not rosemary and Romeo begin both
Unfold the imagin'd happiness that both
How shall that faith return again to earth
Even now the frozen bosom of the North
She wakes; and I entreated her come forth
Beg pardon of the Prince, and call thee back
Doth my name lodge? Tell me, that I may sack
Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
Did not attend him as we rode? I think
Romeo, that spoke him fair, bid him bethink
Or walk in thievish ways, or bid me lurk
How nice the quarrel was, and urg'd withal
Of a poor pothecary, and therewithal
Cap. All things that we ordained festival
As is the night before some festival
Such comfort as do lusty young men feel
When well apparell'd April on the heel
And in my temper soft'ned valour's steel
And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail
villain, that fights by the book of arithmetic! Why the devil
they are past compare. He is not the flower of courtesy, but, I'll
For I am sure you have your hands full all
Ben. O noble Prince. I can discover all
Ah ha, my mistresses! which of you all
Have they been merry! which their keepers call
To paly ashes, thy eyes' windows fall
Wife. O me! this sight of death is as a bell
And there she shall at Friar Laurence' cell
Jul. I met the youthful lord at Laurence' cell
Meaning to keep her closely at my cell
O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell
That I have worn a visor and could tell
Friar. O, she knew well
So fairly bound? O, that deceit should dwell
O, in this love, you love your child so ill
Now is the sun upon the highmost hill
Two such opposed kings encamp them still
Who knocks so hard? Whence come you? What's your will
Apoth. Put this in any liquid thing you will
What said my man when my betossed soul
That late thou gavest me; for Mercutio's soul
thou hast more of the wild goose in one of thy wits than, I am
Shall give him such an unaccustom'd dram
Haply some poison yet doth hang on them
Mon. I neither know it nor can learn of him
And, to say truth, Verona brags of him
If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him
We took this mattock and this spade from him
Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him
Mer. This cannot anger him. 'Twould anger him
Young Adam Cupid, he that shot so trim
Rom. Father, what news? What is the Prince's doom
And 'twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm
With this night's revels and expire the term
Not half so big as a round little worm
As is the bud bit with an envious worm
Nurse. An 'a speak anything against me, I'll take him down, an
other reason but because thou hast hazel eyes. What eye but such an
Pet. Then have at you with my wit! I will dry-beat you with an
Serv. Perhaps you have learned it without book. But I pray, can
Serv. You shall have none ill, sir; for I'll try if they can
And with wild looks bid me devise some mean
Nurse. A man, young lady! lady, such a man
Madam, if you could find out but a man
butcher of a silk button, a duellist, a duellist! a gentleman
O courteous Tybalt! honest gentleman
Waking or sleeping, still my care hath been
Could not take truce with the unruly spleen
are ever thrust to the wall. Therefore I will push Montague's men
Nurse. No less? Nay, bigger! Women grow by men
With instruments upon them fit to open
Serv. Find them out whose names are written here? It is written
As is a winged messenger of heaven
Unless that husband send it me from heaven
As daylight doth a lamp; her eyes in heaven
great natural that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in
when 'twas a little prating thing- O, there is a nobleman in
Ben. Come, knock and enter; and no sooner in
Mer. Come, come, thou art as hot a jack in thy mood as any in
Now, Tybalt, take the 'villain' back again
Depart again. Here, here will I remain
But where unbruised youth with unstuff'd brain
Ben. Go then, for 'tis in vain
Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain
Jul. Where I have learnt me to repent the sin
Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on
That were some spite; my invocation
Par. I do defy thy, conjuration
Of disobedient opposition
Which craves as desperate an execution
Of healths five fadom deep; and then anon
But for the sunset of my brother's son
Away from light steals home my heavy son
And here he writes that he did buy a poison
here writ, and can never find what names the writing person
Lady. Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn
When presently through all thy veins shall run
Ben. Madam, an hour before the worshipp'd sun
One fairer than my love? The all-seeing sun
But all so soon as the all-cheering sun
Serv. Marry, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick his own
With more of thine. This love that thou hast shown
I would not for the wealth of all this town
That runaway eyes may wink, and Romeo
Nurse. Hie to your chamber. I'll find Romeo
Benvolio, nephew to Montague, and friend to Romeo
The form of death. Meantime I writ to Romeo
I wake before the time that Romeo
She will beshrew me much that Romeo
is 'music with her silver sound' because musicians have no
Thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no
Rom. I stretch it out for that word 'broad,' which, added to
was come to the whole depth of my tale, and meant indeed to
Nurse. Well, you have made a simple choice; you know not how to
Rom. Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I protest unto
And being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two
The obsequies that I for thee will keep
Rom. If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep
Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship
O churl! drunk all, and left no friendly drop
To County Paris, to prepare him up
Prince. Come, Montague; for thou art early up
If no inconstant toy nor womanish fear
A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear
I will not marry yet; and when I do, I swear
More fierce and more inexorable far
I am no pilot; yet, wert thou as far
Friar. Too familiar
What if it be a poison which the friar
Nurse. O holy friar, O, tell me, holy friar
But a hare that is hoar
And so good Capulet, which name I tender
Cap. Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender
But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger
I tell you, he that can lay hold of her
Thursday let it be- a Thursday, tell her
As I intended, for it wrought on her
In thy best robes uncovered on the bier
Cap. Make haste, make haste. [Exit Fellow.] Sirrah, fetch drier
A lover may bestride the gossamer
Towards Phoebus' lodging! Such a wagoner
Thou knowest my lodging. Get me ink and paper
To be to thee this night a torchbearer
with his last, the fisher with his pencil and the painter
Was ever book containing such vile matter
choose a man. Romeo? No, not he. Though his face be better
Within the infant rind of this small flower
Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air
Enter an officer, and three or four Citizens with clubs or
Mer. Nay, if our wits run the wild-goose chase, I am done; for
that the shoemaker should meddle with his yard and the tailor
O, she's rich in beauty; only poor
And steep'd in blood? Ah, what an unkind hour
With Tybalt's slander- Tybalt, that an hour
of his pitcher by the ears? Make haste, lest mine be about your
2. Serv. When good manners shall lie all in one or two men's
Ben. At this same ancient feast of Capulet's
very pin of his heart cleft with the blind bow-boy's
look to the plate. Good thou, save me a piece of marchpane and, as
Samp. But if you do, sir, am for you. I serve as good a man as
as an egg is full of meat; and yet thy head hath been beaten as
weapon should quickly have been out, I warrant you. I dare draw as
On pain of torture, from those bloody hands
Jul. Ay me! what news? Why dost thou wring thy hands
Friar. These violent delights have violent ends
Cold death aside and with the other sends
Now, nurse, what news? What hast thou there? the cords
Jul. My ears have yet not drunk a hundred words
What mean these masterless and gory swords
Jul. Is there no pity sitting in the clouds
When he bestrides the lazy-pacing clouds
To an impatient child that hath new robes
Which once untangled much misfortune bodes
Ben. Come, he hath hid himself among these trees
That's by me wounded. Both our remedies
And what obscur'd in this fair volume lies
So soon forsaken? Young men's love then lies
O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies
Tybalt under Romeo's arm thrusts Mercutio in, and flies
Drawn with a team of little atomies
Jul. No, madam; we have cull'd such necessaries
Tyb. Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries
Till we can clear these ambiguities
For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes
It is some meteor that the sun exhales
She is the fairies' midwife, and she comes
Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes
Where for this many hundred years the bones
From forth the fatal loins of these two foes
Rom. Not I, believe me. You have dancing shoes
And more inconstant than the wind, who wooes
Cap. Welcome, gentlemen! Ladies that have their toes
And then will I be general of your woes
But the true ground of all these piteous woes
Remnants of packthread, and old cakes of roses
Lovers can see to do their amorous rites
Rom. I fear, too early; for my mind misgives
More honourable state, more courtship lives
Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves
Retain that dear perfection which he owes
Unto the white-upturned wond'ring eyes
Having some business, do entreat her eyes
Mer. You are a lover. Borrow Cupid's wings
Fellow. I have a head, sir, that will find out logs
Samp. Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them; which is
Mer. 'Tis no less, I tell ye; for the bawdy hand of the dial is
Mer. No hare, sir; unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie, that is
Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is
Pet. O, musicians, because my heart itself plays 'My heart is
Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is
pricksong-keeps time, distance, and proportion; rests me his
I'll find those that shall. Scurvy knave! I am none of his
Her nurse is privy; and if aught in this
shall find me a grave man. I am peppered, I warrant, for this
If, rather than to marry County Paris
And she brings news; and every tongue that speaks
No nightingale. Look, love, what envious streaks
And flecked darkness like a drunkard reels
eye would spy out such a quarrel? Thy head is as full of quarrels
Which ten times faster glide than the sun's beams
Alack, alack, that heaven should practise stratagems
And made Verona's ancient citizens
Alack, alack, what blood is this which stains
As will disperse itself through all the veins
I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins
An alligator stuff'd, and other skins
For I have need of many orisons
And that the lean abhorred monster keeps
And breath'd such life with kisses in my lips
I was your mother much upon these years
O, by this count I shall be much in years
The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars
And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
Mer. Thou art like one of these fellows that, when he enters
Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors
I must up-fill this osier cage of ours
Or shall I come to you at evening mass
Being held a foe, he may not have access
But my true love is grown to such excess
And she as much in love, her means much less
Rom. Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness
Is loathsome in his own deliciousness
The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss
And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
Have thrice disturb'd the quiet of our streets
Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits
Of Tybalt deaf to peace, but that he tilts
Cast by their grave beseeming ornaments
To help me sort such needful ornaments
Juliet, Tybalt, and all the Guests
Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous
Friar. Hold! Get you gone, be strong and prosperous
If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news
So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows
Whose misadventur'd piteous overthrows
Where is she? and how doth she! and what says
Pet. O, I cry you mercy! you are the singer. I will say for you. It
Nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat
Serv. Now I'll tell you without asking. My master is the great
Shall play the empire, arbitrating that
Friar. So smile the heavens upon this holy act
A sleeping potion; which so took effect
A greater power than we can contradict
Since birth and heaven and earth, all three do meet
He that is strucken blind cannot forget
Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet
There shall no figure at such rate be set
Rom. Then plainly know my heart's dear love is set
Jul. Nurse, will you go with me into my closet
Without a sudden calm will overset
foot, and a body, though they be not to be talk'd on, yet
Thou art not conquer'd. Beauty's ensign yet
Rom. I am too sore enpierced with his shaft
Friar. Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift
Let's see for means. O mischief, thou art swift
Get me an iron crow and bring it straight
What torch is yond that vainly lends his light
Of limping Winter treads, even such delight
Shuts up his windows, locks fair daylight
Nurse. O Lord, I could have stay'd here all the night
That plats the manes of horses in the night
That he should hither come as this dire night
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night
That all the world will be in love with night
And never from this palace of dim night
At my poor house look to behold this night
Among fresh female buds shall you this night
And in this state she 'gallops night by night
Will watch thy waking, and that very night
Friar. Saint Francis be my speed! how oft to-night
What cursed foot wanders this way to-night
Jul. O, find him! give this ring to my true knight
Was stay'd by accident, and yesternight
Would through the airy region stream so bright
Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought
Of dear import; and the neglecting it
salutation to your French slop. You gave us the counterfeit
Rom. Well, in that hit you miss. She'll not be hit
And all this day an unaccustom'd spirit
Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit
And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit
Exit
To wreak the love I bore my cousin Tybalt
another for tying his new shoes with an old riband? And yet thou wilt
Or my true heart with treacherous revolt
I saw her laid low in her kindred's vault
Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault
Nurse. Marry, farewell! I Pray you, Sir, what saucy merchant
something stale and hoar ere it be spent
Friar. Hold, then. Go home, be merry, give consent
By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint
Exeunt
fingers. Therefore he that cannot lick his fingers goes not
Friar. Peace, ho, for shame! Confusion's cure lives not
Rom. Thou wast never with me for anything when thou wast not
Here comes the lady. O, so light a foot
Which the commission of thy years and art
O, speak again, bright angel! for thou art
Rom. A torch for me! Let wantons light of heart
Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part
Your looks are pale and wild and do import
My very friend, hath got this mortal hurt
Of this sir-reverence love, wherein thou stick'st
Greg. 'Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou hadst
As Phaeton would whip you to the West
have found him than he was when you sought him. I am the youngest
know it begins with some other letter; and she hath the prettiest
My fingers itch. Wife, we scarce thought us blest
Friar. I hear some noise. Lady, come from that nest
Good night, good night! As sweet repose and rest
Will I set up my everlasting rest
The County Paris hath set up his rest
Which thou wilt propagate, to have it prest
O, look! methinks I see my cousin's ghost
Death lies on her like an untimely frost
flirt-gills; I am none of his skains-mates. And thou must
dry-beat the rest of the eight. Will you pluck your sword out
Mer. Well said! Follow me this jest now till thou hast worn out
Through fair Verona; find those persons out
sirrah, trudge about
Beshrew your heart for sending me about
But fettle your fine joints 'gainst Thursday next
Arms, take your last embrace! and, lips, O you
but 'tis enough, 'twill serve. Ask for me to-morrow, and you
everything in extremity. I must hence to wait. I beseech you
Rom. I can tell you; but young Romeo will be older when you
I will carry no crotchets. I'll re you, I'll fa you. Do you
sententious of it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you
Apoth. Such mortal drugs I have; but Mantua's law
Should in the furthest East bean to draw
Most miserable hour that e'er time saw
Par. Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew
Mer. Why, is not this better now than groaning for love? Now
Mer. Without his roe, like a dried herring. O flesh, flesh, how
By holy marriage. When, and where, and how
Cap. No, not a whit. What, I have watch'd ere now
Rom. I pray thee chide not. She whom I love now
Jul. A rhyme I learnt even now
'An if a man did need a poison now
She is not fourteen. How long is it now
Uncomfortable time, why cam'st thou now
And yet, I warrant, it bad upon it brow
Get you to bed! Faith, you'll be sick to-morrow
Jul. At what o'clock to-morrow
She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow
Thy noble shape is but a form of wax
Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day
I married them; and their stol'n marriage day
Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day
O son, the night before thy wedding day
Most lamentable day, most woful day
Not yet enjoy'd. So tedious is this day
I tell thee what- get thee to church a Thursday
And all my fortunes at thy foot I'll lay
Of her awaking, here untimely lay
Mer. I mean, sir, in delay
The excuse that thou dost make in this delay
thy pump, that, when the single sole of it is worn, the jest may
rich Capulet; and if you be not of the house of Montagues, I pray
Stay not, be gone. Live, and hereafter say
Mon. I would thou wert so happy by thy stay
Rom. 'Tis the way
art thou sociable, now art thou Romeo; now art thou what thou art, by
Evermore show'ring? In one little body
Seeking out Romeo, that did spit his body
[Gives back the paper.] A fair assembly. Whither should they
Which, as they kiss, consume. The sweetest honey
Cap. Things have fall'n out, sir, so unluckily
Peter. I saw no man use you at his pleasure. If I had, my
Samp. No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir; but I bite my
Greg. [aside to Sampson] Say 'better.' Here comes one of my
minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but discords. Here's my
In what vile part of this anatomy
but I'll warrant you, when I say so, she looks as pale as any
Fain would I dwell on form- fain, fain deny
With twenty hundred thousand times more joy
It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy
Now I have stain'd the childhood of our joy
Rom. Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
Which to the high topgallant of my joy
Dry up your tears and stick your rosemary
Ben. Here were the servants of your adversary
these new tuners of accent! 'By Jesu, a very good blade! a very
minim rest, one, two, and the third in your bosom! the very
But O, it presses to my memory
But if thou, jealous, dost return to pry
I will omit no opportunity
It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity
